
In 1957, an earth-born object made by man was launched into 
the universe, where for some weeks it circled the earth according 
to the same laws of gravitation that swing and keep in motion the 
celestial bodies — the sun, the moon, and the stars. To be sure, the 
man-made satellite was no moon or star, no heavenly body which 
could follow its circling path for a time span that to us mortals, 
bound by earthly time, lasts from eternity to eternity. Yet, for a 
time it managed to stay in the skies; it dwelt and moved in the 
proximity of the heavenly bodies as though it had been admitted 
tentatively to their sublime company. 

This event, second in importance to no other, not even to the 
splitting of the atom, would have been greeted with unmitigated 
joy if it had not been for the uncomfortable military and political 
circumstances attending it. But, curiously enough, this joy was not 
triumphal; it was not pride or awe at the tremendousness of human 
power and mastery which filled the hearts of men, who now, when 
they looked up from the earth toward the skies, could behold there 
a thing of their own making. The immediate reaction, expressed 
on the spur of the moment, was relief about the first “step toward 
escape from men’s imprisonment to the earth.” And this strange 
statement, far from being the accidental slip of some American re- 
porter, unwittingly echoed the extraordinary line which, more 
than twenty years ago, had been carved on the funeral obelisk for 
one of Russia’s great scientists: “Mankind will not remain bound 
to the earth forever.” 

Such feelings have been commonplace for some time. They show 
that men everywhere are by no means slow to catch up and adjust 
to scientific discoveries and technical developments, but that, on 
the contrary, they have outsped them by decades. Here, as in other 


respects, science has realized and affirmed what men anticipated 
in dreams that were neither wild nor idle. What is new is only 
that one of this country’s most respectable newspapers finally 
brought to its front page what up to then had been buried in the 
highly non-respectable literature of science fiction (to which, un- 
fortunately, nobody yet has paid the attention it deserves as a 
vehicle of mass sentiments and mass desires) . The banality of the 
statement should not make us overlook how extraordinary in fact 
it was; for although Christians have spoken of the earth as a vale 
of tears and philosophers have looked upon their body as a prison 
of mind or soul, nobody in the history of mankind has ever con- 
ceived of the earth as a prison for men’s bodies or shown such 
eagerness to go literally from here to the moon. Should the emanci- 
pation and secularization of the modern age, which began with a 
turning-away, not necessarily from God, but from a god who was 
the Father of men in heaven, end with an even more fateful repudi- 
ation of an Earth who was the Mother of all living creatures under 
the sky? 

The earth is the very quintessence of the human condition, and 
earthly nature, for all we know, may be unique in the universe 
in providing human beings with a habitat in which they can move 
and breathe without effort and without artifice. The human artifice 
of the world separates human existence from all mere animal en- 
vironment, but life itself is outside this artificial world, and through 
life man remains related to all other living organisms. For some 
time now, a great many scientific endeavors have been directed 
toward making life also “artificial,” toward cutting the last tie 
through which even man belongs among the children of nature. 
It is the same desire to escape from imprisonment to the earth that 
is manifest in the attempt to create life in the test tube, in the de- 
sire to mix “frozen germ plasm from people of demonstrated 
ability under the microscope to produce superior human beings” 
and “to alter [their] size, shape and function”; and the wish to 
escape the human condition, I suspect, also underlies the hope to 
extend man’s life-span far beyond the hundred-year limit. 

This future man, whom the scientists tell us they will produce 
in no more than a hundred years, seems to be possessed by a rebel- 
lion against human existence as it has been given, a free gift from 

[ 2 ] 


nowhere (secularly speaking), which he wishes to exchange, as it 
were, for something he has made himself. There is no reason to 
doubt our abilities to accomplish such an exchange, just as there 
is no reason to doubt our present ability to destroy all organic life 
on earth. The question is only whether we wish to use our new 
scientific and technical knowledge in this direction, and this ques- 
tion cannot be decided by scientific means; it is a political question 
of the first order and therefore can hardly be left to the decision of 
professional scientists or professional politicians. 

While such possibilities still may lie in a distant future, the first 
boomerang effects of science’s great triumphs have made them- 
selves felt in a crisis within the natural sciences themselves. The 
trouble concerns the fact that the “truths” of the modern scientific 
world view, though they can be demonstrated in mathematical 
formulas and proved technologically, will no longer lend them- 
selves to normal expression in speech and thought. The moment 
these “truths” are spoken of conceptually and coherently, the re- 
sulting statements will be “not perhaps as meaningless as a ‘tri- 
angular circle,’ but much more so than a ‘winged lion’ ” (Erwin 
Schrodinger) . We do not yet know whether this situation is final. 
But it could be that we, who are earth-bound creatures and have 
begun to act as though we were dwellers of the universe, will for- 
ever be unable to understand, that is, to think and speak about the 
things which nevertheless we are able to do. In this case, it would 
be as though our brain, which constitutes the physical, material 
condition of our thoughts, were unable to follow what we do, so 
that from now on we would indeed need artificial machines to do 
our thinking and speaking. If it should turn out to be true that 
knowledge (in the modern sense of know-how) and thought have 
parted company for good, then we would indeed become the help- 
less slaves, not so much of our machines as of our know-how, 
thoughtless creatures at the mercy of every gadget which is tech- 
nically possible, no matter how murderous it is. 

However, even apart from these last and yet uncertain conse- 
quences, the situation created by the sciences is of great political 
significance. Wherever the relevance of speech is at stake, matters 
become political by definition, for speech is what makes man a 
political being. If we would follow the advice, so frequently urged 

[ 3 ] 


upon us, to adjust our cultural attitudes to the present status of 
scientific achievement, we would in all earnest adopt a way of 
life in which speech is no longer meaningful. For the sciences today 
have been forced to adopt a “language” of mathematical symbols 
which, though it was originally meant only as an abbreviation for 
spoken statements, now contains statements that in no way can be 
translated back into speech. The reason why it may be wise to 
distrust the political judgment of scientists qua scientists is not 
primarily their lack of “character” — that they did not refuse to 
develop atomic weapons — or their naivete — that they did not 
understand that once these weapons were developed they would 
be the last to be consulted about their use- — but precisely the fact 
that they move in a world where speech has lost its power. And 
whatever men do or know or experience can make sense only to 
the extent that it can be spoken about. There may be truths be- 
yond speech, and they may be of great relevance to man in the 
singular, that is, to man in so far as he is not a political being, 
whatever else he may be. Men in the plural, that is, men in so far 
as they live and move and act in this world, can experience mean- 
ingfulness only because they can talk with and make sense to each 
other and to themselves. 

Closer at hand and perhaps equally decisive is another no less 
threatening event. This is the advent of automation, which in a 
few decades probably will empty the factories and liberate man- 
kind from its oldest and most natural burden, the burden of labor- 
ing and the bondage to necessity. Here, too, a fundamental aspect 
of the human condition is at stake, but the rebellion against it, the 
wish to be liberated from labor’s “toil and trouble,” is not modern 
but as old as recorded history. Freedom from labor itself is not 
new; it once belonged among the most firmly established privileges 
of the few. In this instance, it seems as though scientific progress 
and technical developments had been only taken advantage of to 
achieve something about which all former ages dreamed but which 
none had been able to realize. 

However, this is so only in appearance. The modern age has 
carried with it a theoretical glorification of labor and has resulted 
in a factual transformation of the whole of society into a laboring 
society. The fulfilment of the wish, therefore, like the fulfilment 

[ 4 ] 

[[Prologue]]


of wishes in fairy tales, comes at a moment when it can only be 
self-defeating. It is a society of laborers which is about to be liber- 
ated from the fetters of labor, and this society does no longer know 
of those other higher and more meaningful activities for the sake 
of which this freedom would deserve to be won. Within this so- 
ciety, which is egalitarian because this is labor’s way of making 
men live together, there is no class left, no aristocracy of either a 
political or spiritual nature from which a restoration of the other 
capacities of man could start anew. Even presidents, kings, and 
prime ministers think of their offices in terms of a job necessary 
for the life of society, and among the intellectuals, only solitary 
individuals are left who consider what they are doing in terms of 
work and not in terms of making a living. What we are confronted 
with is the prospect of a society of laborers without labor, that is, 
without the only activity left to them. Surely, nothing could be 
worse. 

To these preoccupations and perplexities, this book does not 
offer an answer. Such answers are given every day, and they are 
matters of practical politics, subject to the agreement of many; 
they can never lie in theoretical considerations or the opinion of 
one person, as though we dealt here with problems for which only 
one solution is possible. What I propose in the following is a re- 
consideration of the human condition from the vantage point of 
our newest experiences and our most recent fears. This, obviously, 
is a matter of thought, and thoughtlessness — the heedless reckless- 
ness or hopeless confusion or complacent repetition of “truths” 
which have become trivial and empty — seems to me among the 
outstanding characteristics of our time. What I propose, therefore, 
is very simple: it is nothing more than to think what we are doing. 

“What we are doing” is indeed the central theme of this book. 
It deals only with the most elementary articulations of the human 
condition, with those activities that traditionally, as well as ac- 
cording to current opinion, are within the range of every human 
being. For this and other reasons, the highest and perhaps purest 
activity of which men are capable, the activity of thinking, is left 
out of these present considerations. Systematically, therefore, the 
book is limited to a discussion of labor, work, and action, which 
forms its three central chapters. Historically, I deal in a last chap- 

[ 5 ]


ter with the modern age, and throughout the book with the various 
constellations within the hierarchy of activities as we know them 
from Western history. 

However, the modern age is not the same as the modern world. 
Scientifically, the modern age which began in the seventeenth cen- 
tury came to an end at the beginning of the twentieth century; 
politically, the modern world, in which we live today, was born 
with the first atomic explosions. I do not discuss this modern 
world, against whose background this book was written. I confine 
myself, on the one hand, to an analysis of those general human 
capacities which grow out of the human condition and are perma- 
nent, that is, which cannot be irretrievably lost so long as the hu- 
man condition itself is not changed. The purpose of the historical 
analysis, on the other hand, is to trace back modern world aliena- 
tion, its twofold flight from the earth into the universe and from 
the world into the self, to its origins, in order to arrive at an un- 
derstanding of the nature of society as it had developed and pre- 
sented itself at the very moment when it was overcome by the 
advent of a new and yet unknown age. 



[[CHAPTER 1]]

[[[Vita Activa and the Humand Condition]]] 

With the term vita activa , I propose to designate three fundamental 
human activities: labor, work, and action. They are fundamental 
because each corresponds to one of the basic conditions under 
which life on earth has been given to man. 

Labor is the activity which corresponds to the biological process 
of the human body, whose spontaneous growth, metabolism, and 
eventual decay are bound to the vital necessities produced and fed 
into the life process by labor. The human condition of labor is life 
itself. 

Work is the activity which corresponds to the unnaturalness of 
human existence, which is not imbedded in, and whose mortality 
is not compensated by, the species’ ever-recurring life cycle. Work 
provides an “artificial” world of things, distinctly different from 
all natural surroundings. Within its borders each individual life is 
housed, while this world itself is meant to outlast and transcend 
them all. The human condition of work is worldliness. 

Action, the only activity that goes on directly between men 
without the intermediary of things or matter, corresponds to the 
human condition of plurality, to the fact that men, not Man, live 
on the earth and inhabit the world. While all aspects of the hu- 
man condition are somehow related to politics, this plurality is 
specifically the condition- — not only the conditio sine qua non , but 
the conditio per quam — of all political life. Thus the language of the 
Romans, perhaps the most political people we have known, used 
the words “to live” and “to be among men” {inter homines esse ) 

[ 7 ] 


or “to die” and “to cease to be among men” (inter homines esse de- 
sinere) as synonyms. But in its most elementary form, the human 
condition of action is implicit even in Genesis (“Male and female 
created He them ”), if we understand that this story of man’s crea- 
tion is distinguished in principle from the one according to which 
God originally created Man ( adam ), “him” and not “them,” so 
that the multitude of human beings becomes the result of multipli- 
cation. Action would be an unnecessary luxury, a capricious in- 
terference with general laws of behavior, if men were endlessly 
reproducible repetitions of the same model, whose nature or es- 
sence was the same for all and as predictable as the nature or 
essence of any other thing. Plurality is the condition of human 
action because we are all the same, that is, human, in such a way 
that nobody is ever the same as anyone else who ever lived, lives, 
or will live. 

All three activities and their corresponding conditions are inti- 
mately connected with the most general condition of human exist- 
ence: birth and death, natality and mortality. Labor assures not 
only individual survival, but the life of the species. Work and its 
product, the human artifact, bestow a measure of permanence and 
durability upon the futility of mortal life and the fleeting character 
of human time. Action, in so far as it engages in founding and pre- 

[ 8 ] 

serving political bodies, creates the condition for remembrance, 
that is, for history. Labor and work, as well as action, are also 
rooted in natality in so far as they have the task to provide and pre- 
serve the world for, to foresee and reckon with, the constant in- 
flux of newcomers who are bom into the world as strangers. How- 
ever, of the three, action has the closest connection with the hu- 
man condition of natality; the new beginning inherent in birth can 
make itself felt in the world only because the newcomer possesses 
the capacity of beginning something anew, that is, of acting. In 
this sense of initiative, an element of action, and therefore of 
natality, is inherent in all human activities. Moreover, since action 
is the political activity par excellence, natality, and not mortality, 
may be the central category of political, as distinguished from 
metaphysical, thought. 

The human condition comprehends more than the conditions 
under which life has been given to man. Men are conditioned 
beings because everything they come in contact with turns imme- 
diately into a condition of their existence. The world in which the 
vita activa spends itself consists of things produced by human ac- 
tivities; but the things that owe their existence exclusively to men 
nevertheless constantly condition their human makers. In addition 
to the conditions under which life is given to man on earth, and 
partly out of them, men constantly create their own, self-made 
conditions, which, their human origin and their variability not- 
withstanding, possess the same conditioning power as natural 
things. Whatever touches or enters into a sustained relationship 
with human life immediately assumes the character of a condition 
of human existence. This is why men, no matter what they do, are 
always conditioned beings. Whatever enters the human world of 
its own accord or is drawn into it by human effort becomes part 
of the human condition. The impact of the world’s reality upon 
human existence is felt and received as a conditioning force. The 
objectivity of the world — its object- or thing-character— and the 
human condition supplement each other; because human existence 
is conditioned existence, it would be impossible without things, 
and things would be a heap of unrelated articles, a non-world, if 
they were not the conditioners of human existence. 

To avoid misunderstanding: the human condition is not the 

[ 9 ] 

same as human nature, and the sum total of human activities and 
capabilities which correspond to the human condition does not con- 
stitute anything like human nature. For neither those we discuss 
here nor those we leave out, like thought and reason, and not even 
the most meticulous enumeration of them all, constitute essential 
characteristics of human existence in the sense that without them 
this existence would no longer be human. The most radical change 
in the human condition we can imagine would be an emigration of 
men from the earth to some other planet. Such an event, no longer 
totally impossible, would imply that man would have to live under 
man-made conditions, radically different from those the earth 
offers him. Neither labor nor work nor action nor, indeed, thought 
as we know it would then make sense any longer. Yet even these 
hypothetical wanderers from the earth would still be human; but 
the only statement we could make regarding their “nature” is that 
they still are conditioned beings, even though their condition is 
now self-made to a considerable extent. 

The problem of human nature, the Augustinian quaestio mihi 
f actus sum (“a question have I become for myself’), seems un- 
answerable in both its individual psychological sense and its gen- 
eral philosophical sense. It is highly unlikely that we, who can 
know, determine, and define the natural essences of all things sur- 
rounding us, which we are not, should ever be able to do the same 
for ourselves — this would be like jumping over our own shadows. 
Moreover, nothing entitles us to assume that man has a nature or 
essence in the same sense as other things. In other words, if we 
have a nature or essence, then surely only a god could know and 
define it, and the first prerequisite would be that he be able to 
speak about a “who” as though it were a “what.” The perplexity 

[ 10 ]

is that the modes of human cognition applicable to things with 
“natural” qualities, including ourselves to the limited extent that 
we are specimens of the most highly developed species of organic 
life, fail us when we raise the question: And who are we? This is 
why attempts to define human nature almost invariably end with 
some construction of a deity, that is, with the god of the philoso- 
phers, who, since Plato, has revealed himself upon closer inspec- 
tion to be a kind of Platonic idea of man. Of course, to demask such 
philosophic concepts of the divine as conceptualizations of human 
capabilities and qualities is not a demonstration of, not even an 
argument for, the non-existence of God; but the fact that attempts 
to define the nature of man lead so easily into an idea which defi- 
nitely strikes us as “superhuman” and therefore is identified with 
the divine may cast suspicion upon the very concept of “human 
nature.” 

On the other hand, the conditions of human existence — life it- 
self, natality and mortality, worldliness, plurality, and the earth- 
can never “explain” what we are or answer the question of who 
we are for the simple reason that they never condition us absolute- 
ly. This has always been the opinion of philosophy, in distinction 
from the sciences — anthropology, psychology, biology, etc. — 
which also concern themselves with man. But today we may al- 
most say that we have demonstrated even scientifically that, 
though we live now, and probably always will, under the earth’s 
conditions, we are not mere earth-bound creatures. Modern nat- 
ural science owes its great triumphs to having looked upon and 
treated earth-bound nature from a truly universal viewpoint, that 
is, from an Archimedean standpoint taken, wilfully and explicitly, 
outside the earth. 

[ 11 ] 
 

[[[The Term Vita Activa]]]

The term vita activa is loaded and overloaded with tradition. It is 
as old as (but not older than) our tradition of political thought. 
And this tradition, far from comprehending and conceptualizing 
all the political experiences of Western mankind, grew out of a 
specific historical constellation: the trial of Socrates and the con- 
flict between the philosopher and the polls. It eliminated many ex- 
periences of an earlier past that were irrelevant to its immediate 
political purposes and proceeded until its end, in the work of Karl 
Marx, in a highly selective manner. The term itself, in medieval 
philosophy the standard translation of the Aristotelian bios politi- 
kos, already occurs in Augustine, where, as vita negotiosa or actuosa, 
it still reflects its original meaning: a life devoted to public-political 
matters. 

Aristotle distinguished three ways of life ( bioi ) which men 
might choose in freedom, that is, in full independence of the neces- 
sities of life and the relationships they originated. This prerequisite 
of freedom ruled out all ways of life chiefly devoted to keeping 
one’s self alive — not only labor, which was the way of life of the 
slave, who was coerced by the necessity to stay alive and by the 
rule of his master, but also the working life of the free craftsman 
and the acquisitive life of the merchant. In short, it excluded every- 
body who involuntarily or voluntarily, for his whole life or tem- 
porarily, had lost the free disposition of his movements and ac- 
tivities. The remaining three ways of life have in common that 

[ 12 ]

they were concerned with the “beautiful,” that is, with things 
neither necessary nor merely useful: the life of enjoying bodily 
pleasures in which the beautiful, as it is given, is consumed; 
the life devoted to the matters of the polls, in which excellence pro- 
duces beautiful deeds; and the life of the philosopher devoted to 
inquiry into, and contemplation of, things eternal, whose ever- 
lasting beauty can neither be brought about through the producing 
interference of man nor be changed through his consumption of 
them.

The chief difference between the Aristotelian and the later me- 
dieval use of the term is that the bios politikos denoted explicitly 
only the realm of human affairs, stressing the action, praxis , needed 
to establish and sustain it. Neither labor nor work was considered 
to possess sufficient dignity to constitute a bios at all, an autono- 
mous and authentically human way of life; since they served and 
produced what was necessary and useful, they could not be free, in- 
dependent of human needs and wants. That the political way of 
life escaped this verdict is due to the Greek understanding of polls 
life, which to them denoted a very special and freely chosen form 
of political organization and by no means just any form of action 
necessary to keep men together in an orderly fashion. Not that 
the Greeks or Aristotle were ignorant of the fact that human life 
always demands some form of political organization and that rul- 
ing over subjects might constitute a distinct way of life; but the 
despot’s way of life, because it was “merely” a necessity, could 
not be considered free and had no relationship with the bios 
politikos.' 

[ 13 ] 

With the disappearance of the ancient city-state— Augustine 
seems to have been the last to know at least what it once meant 
to be a citizen — the term vita activa lost its specifically political 
meaning and denoted all kinds of active engagement in the things of 
this world. To be sure, it does not follow that work and labor had 
risen in the hierarchy of human activities and were now equal in 
dignity with a life devoted to politics. It was, rather, the other 
way round: action was now also reckoned among the necessities 
of earthly life, so that contemplation (the bios theoretikos , trans- 
lated into the vita contemplativa ) was left as the only truly free way 
of life.

However, the enormous superiority of contemplation over ac- 
tivity of any kind, action not excluded, is not Christian in origin. 
We find it in Plato’s political philosophy, where the whole utopian 
reorganization of polis life is not only directed by the superior in- 
sight of the philosopher but has no aim other than to make possible 
the philosopher’s way of life. Aristotle’s very articulation of the 
different ways of life, in whose order the life of pleasure plays a 
minor role, is clearly guided by the ideal of contemplation ( theoria ) . 
To the ancient freedom from the necessities of life and from com- 
pulsion by others, the philosophers added freedom and surcease 
from political activity ( skhole ), so that the later Christian claim 
to be free from entanglement in worldly affairs, from all the busi- 

[ M ] 


ness of this world, was preceded by and originated in the philo- 
sophic apolitia of late antiquity. What had been demanded only 
by the few was now considered to be a right of all. 

The term vita activa, comprehending all human activities and de- 
fined from the viewpoint of the absolute quiet of contemplation, 
therefore corresponds more closely to the Greek askholia (“un- 
quiet”), with which Aristotle designated all activity, than to the 
Greek bios politikos. As early as Aristotle the distinction between 
quiet and unquiet, between an almost breathless abstention from 
external physical movement and activity of every kind, is more 
decisive than the distinction between the political and the theoreti- 
cal way of life, because it can eventually be found within each of 
the three ways of life. It is like the distinction between war and 
peace: just as war takes place for the sake of peace, thus every 
kind of activity, even the processes of mere thought, must cul- 
minate in the absolute quiet of contemplation. Every movement, 
the movements of body and soul as well as of speech and reason- 
ing, must cease before truth. Truth, be it the ancient truth of Being 
or the Christian truth of the living God, can reveal itself only in 
complete human stillness.

Traditionally and up to the beginning of the modern age, the 
term vita activa never lost its negative connotation of “un-quiet,” 
nec-otium , a-skholia. As such it remained intimately related to the 
even more fundamental Greek distinction between things that are 
by themselves whatever they are and things which owe their exist- 
ence to man, between things that are physei and things that are 
nomd. The primacy of contemplation over activity rests on the con- 
viction that no work of human hands can equal in beauty and truth 
the physical kosmos , which swings in itself in changeless eternity 
without any interference or assistance from outside, from man or 
god. This eternity discloses itself to mortal eyes only when all 
human movements and activities are at perfect rest. Compared 
with this attitude of quiet, all distinctions and articulations within 

[ 15 ] 

the vita activa disappear. Seen from the viewpoint of contemplation, 
it does not matter what disturbs the necessary quiet, as long as it 
is disturbed. 

Traditionally, therefore, the term vita activa receives its meaning 
from the vita contemplativa ; its very restricted dignity is bestowed 
upon it because it serves the needs and wants of contemplation in 
a living body. Christianity, with its belief in a hereafter whose 
joys announce themselves in the delights of contemplation , con- 
ferred a religious sanction upon the abasement of the vita activa to 
its derivative, secondary position; but the determination of the 
order itself coincided with the very discovery of contemplation 
(theoria) as a human faculty, distinctly different from thought 
and reasoning, which occurred in the Socratic school and from 
then on has ruled metaphysical and political thought throughout 
our tradition. It seems unnecessary to my present purpose to 
discuss the reasons for this tradition. Obviously they are deeper 
than the historical occasion which gave rise to the conflict between 
the polls and the philosopher and thereby, almost incidentally, also 
led to the discovery of contemplation as the philosopher’s way of 
life. They must lie in an altogether different aspect of the human 
condition, whose diversity is not exhausted in the various articula- 
tions of the vita activa and, we may suspect, would not be exhausted 
even if thought and the movement of reasoning were included in it. 

If, therefore, the use of the term vita activa , as I propose it here, 

[ 16 ] 

is in manifest contradiction to the tradition, it is because I doubt 
not the validity of the experience underlying the distinction but 
rather the hierarchical order inherent in it from its inception. This 
does not mean that I wish to contest or even to discuss, for that 
matter, the traditional concept of truth as revelation and therefore 
something essentially given to man, or that I prefer the modern 
age’s pragmatic assertion that man can know only what he makes 
himself. My contention is simply that the enormous weight of con- 
templation in the traditional hierarchy has blurred the distinctions 
and articulations within the vita activa itself and that, appearances 
notwithstanding, this condition has not been changed essentially 
by the modern break with the tradition and the eventual reversal of 
its hierarchical order in Marx and Nietzsche. It lies in the very 
nature of the famous “turning upside down” of philosophic systems 
or currently accepted values, that is, in the nature of the operation 
itself, that the conceptual framework is left more or less intact. 

The modern reversal shares with the traditional hierarchy the 
assumption that the same central human preoccupation must pre- 
vail in all activities of men, since without one comprehensive prin- 
ciple no order could be established. This assumption is not a mat- 
ter of course, and my use of the term vita activa presupposes that 
the concern underlying all its activities is not the same as and is 
neither superior nor inferior to the central concern of the vita con- 
templativa. 

[[[Eternity Versus Immortality]]]

That the various modes of active engagement in the things of this 
world, on one side, and pure thought culminating in contempla- 
tion, on the other, might correspond to two altogether different 
central human concerns has in one way or another been manifest 
ever since “the men of thought and the men of action began to take 
different paths ,” that is, since the rise of political thought in the 

[ 17 ] 

Socratic school. However, when the philosophers discovered — and 
it is probable, though unprovable, that this discovery was made by 
Socrates himself— that the political realm did not as a matter of 
course provide for all of man’s higher activities, they assumed at 
once, not that they had found something different in addition to 
what was already known, but that they had found a higher prin- 
ciple to replace the principle that ruled the polis. The shortest, 
albeit somewhat superficial, way to indicate these two different 
and to an extent even conflicting principles is to recall the dis- 
tinction between immortality and eternity. 

Immortality means endurance in time, deathless life on this 
earth and in this world as it was given, according to Greek under- 
standing, to nature and the Olympian gods. Against this back- 
ground of nature’s ever-recurring life and the gods’ deathless and 
ageless lives stood mortal men, the only mortals in an immortal 
but not eternal universe, confronted with the immortal lives of 
their gods but not under the rule of an eternal God. If we trust 
Herodotus, the difference between the two seems to have been 
striking to Greek self-understanding prior to the conceptual articu- 
lation of the philosophers, and therefore prior to the specifically 
Greek experiences of the eternal which underlie this articulation. 
Herodotus, discussing Asiatic forms of worship and beliefs in an 
invisible God, mentions explicitly that compared with this tran- 
scendent God (as we would say today) who is beyond time and 
life and the universe, the Greek gods are anthropophyeis, have the 
same nature, not simply the same shape, as man. The Greeks’ con- 
cern with immortality grew out of their experience of an immortal 
nature and immortal gods which together surrounded the individu- 
al lives of mortal men. Imbedded in a cosmos where everything 
was immortal, mortality became the hallmark of human existence. 
Men are “the mortals,” the only mortal things in existence, be- 
cause unlike animals they do not exist only as members of a species 

[ 18 ]

whose immortal life is guaranteed through procreation. The mor- 
tality of men lies in the fact that individual life, with a recogniz- 
able life-story from birth to death, rises out of biological life. This 
individual life is distinguished from all other things by the recti- 
linear course of its movement, which, so to speak, cuts through 
the circular movement of biological life. This is mortality: to move 
along a rectilinear line in a universe where everything, if it moves 
at all, moves in a cyclical order. 

The task and potential greatness of mortals lie in their ability 
to produce things— works and deeds and words — which would 
deserve to be and, at least to a degree, are at home in everlasting- 
ness, so that through them mortals could find their place in a cos- 
mos where everything is immortal except themselves. By their 
capacity for the immortal deed, by their ability to leave non- 
perishable traces behind, men, their individual mortality notwith- 
standing, attain an immortality of their own and prove themselves 
to be of a “divine” nature. The distinction between man and ani- 
mal runs right through the human species itself: only the best 
( aristoi ), who constantly prove themselves to be the best ( aristeu - 
ein, a verb for which there is no equivalent in any other language) 
and who “prefer immortal fame to mortal things,” are really hu- 
man; the others, content with whatever pleasures nature will yield 
them, live and die like animals. This was still the opinion of Hera- 
clitus, an opinion whose equivalent one will find in hardly any 
philosopher after Socrates. 

[ 19 ] 

In our context it is of no great importance whether Socrates 
himself or Plato discovered the eternal as the true center of strictly 
metaphysical thought. It weighs heavily in favor of Socrates that 
he alone among the great thinkers — unique in this as in many other 
respects — never cared to write down his thoughts; for it is obvious 
that, no matter how concerned a thinker may be with eternity, the 
moment he sits down to write his thoughts he ceases to be con- 
cerned primarily with eternity and shifts his attention to leaving 
some trace of them. He has entered the vita activa and chosen its 
way of permanence and potential immortality. One thing is cer- 
tain: it is only in Plato that concern with the eternal and the life of 
the philosopher are seen as inherently contradictory and in conflict 
with the striving for immortality, the way of life of the citizen, the 
bios politikos. 

The philosopher’s experience of the eternal, which to Plato was 
arrheton (“unspeakable”), and to Aristotle aneu logon (“without 
word”), and which later was conceptualized in the paradoxical 
nunc stans (“the standing now”), can occur only outside the realm 
of human affairs and outside the plurality of men, as we know 
from the Cave parable in Plato’s Republic , where the philosopher, 
having liberated himself from the fetters that bound him to his fel- 
low men, leaves the cave in perfect “singularity,” as it were, 
neither accompanied nor followed by others. Politically speaking, 
if to die is the same as “to cease to be among men,” experience of 
the eternal is a kind of death, and the only thing that separates it 
from real death is that it is not final because no living creature can 
endure it for any length of time. And this is precisely what sepa- 
rates the vita contemplativa from the vita activa in medieval 
thought . Yet it is decisive that the experience of the eternal, in 
contradistinction to that of the immortal, has no correspondence 
with and cannot be transformed into any activity whatsoever, 
since even the activity of thought, which goes on within one’s self 
by means of words, is obviously not only inadequate to render it 
but would interrupt and ruin the experience itself. 

Theoria, or “contemplation,” is the word given to the experience 
of the eternal, as distinguished from all other attitudes, which at 

[ 20 ] 

most may pertain to immortality. It may be that the philosophers’ 
discovery of the eternal was helped by their very justified doubt of 
the chances of the polls for immortality or even permanence, and it 
may be that the shock of this discovery was so overwhelming that 
they could not but look down upon all striving for immortality as 
vanity and vainglory, certainly placing themselves thereby into 
open opposition to the ancient city-state and the religion which in- 
spired it. However, the eventual victory of the concern with 
eternity over all kinds of aspirations toward immortality is not 
due to philosophic thought. The fall of the Roman Empire plainly 
demonstrated that no work of mortal hands can be immortal, and 
it was accompanied by the rise of the Christian gospel of an ever- 
lasting individual life to its position as the exclusive religion of 
Western mankind. Both together made any striving for an earthly 
immortality futile and unnecessary. And they succeeded so well 
in making the vita activa and the bios politikos the handmaidens of 
contemplation that not even the rise of the secular in the modern 
age and the concomitant reversal of the traditional hierarchy be- 
tween action and contemplation sufficed to save from oblivion the 
striving for immortality which originally had been the spring and 
center of the vita activa. 


[ 21 ] 


[[ CHAPTER II: The Public and the Private Realm ]] 

[[[ Man: A Social or a Political Animal ]]]

The vita activa, human life in so far as it is actively engaged in 
doing something, is always rooted in a world of men and of man- 
made things which it never leaves or altogether transcends. Things 
and men form the environment for each of man’s activities, which 
would be pointless without such location; yet this environment, 
the world into which we are born, would not exist without the 
human activity which produced it, as in the case of fabricated 
things; which takes care of it, as in the case of cultivated land; or 
which established it through organization, as in the case of the 
body politic. No human life, not even the life of the hermit in 
nature’s wilderness, is possible without a world which directly or 
indirectly testifies to the presence of other human beings. 

All human activities are conditioned by the fact that men live 
together, but it is only action that cannot even be imagined out- 
side the society of men. The activity of labor does not need the 
presence of others, though a being laboring in complete solitude 
would not be human but an animal laborans in the word’s most 
literal significance. Man working and fabricating and building a 
world inhabited only by himself would still be a fabricator, 
though not homo faber: he would have lost his specifically human 
quality and, rather, be a god — not, to be sure, the Creator, but a 
divine demiurge as Plato described him in one of his myths. Action 
alone is the exclusive prerogative of man; neither a beast nor a god 

[ 22 ] 

is capable of it, and only action is entirely dependent upon the 
constant presence of others. 

This special relationship between action and being together 
seems fully to justify the early translation of Aristotle’s zoonpoliti- 
kon by animal socialis, already found in Seneca, which then became 
the standard translation through Thomas Aquinas: homo est natu- 
raliter politicus, id est, socialis (“man is by nature political, that is, 
social”) . More than any elaborate theory, this unconscious sub- 
stitution of the social for the political betrays the extent to which 
the original Greek understanding of politics had been lost. For 
this, it is significant but not decisive that the word “social” is 
Roman in origin and has no equivalent in Greek language or 
thought. Yet the Latin usage of the word societas also originally had 
a clear, though limited, political meaning; it indicated an alliance 
between people for a specific purpose, as when men organize in 
order to rule others or to commit a crime. It is only with the later 

[ 23 ]

concept of a societas generis humani , a “society of man-kind,”
that the term “social” begins to acquire the general meaning of a 
fundamental human condition. It is not that Plato or Aristotle was 
ignorant of, or unconcerned with, the fact that man cannot live 
outside the company of men, but they did not count this condition 
among the specifically human characteristics; on the contrary, it 
was something human life had in common with animal life, and 
for this reason alone it could not be fundamentally human. The 
natural, merely social companionship of the human species was 
considered to be a limitation imposed upon us by the needs of bio- 
logical life, which are the same for the human animal as for other 
forms of animal life. 

According to Greek thought, the human capacity for political 
organization is not only different from but stands in direct oppo- 
sition to that natural association whose center is the home ( oikia ) 
and the family. The rise of the city-state meant that man received 
“besides his private life a sort of second life, his bios politikos . Now 
every citizen belongs to two orders of existence; and there is a 
sharp distinction in his life between what is his own (idion) and 
what is communal ( koinon ).” It was not just an opinion or theory 
of Aristotle but a simple historical fact that the foundation of the 
polis was preceded by the destruction of all organized units resting 
on kinship, such as th ephratria and the phyle. Of all the activities 

[ 24 ] 

necessary and present in human communities, only two were 
deemed to be political and to constitute what Aristotle called the 
bios politikos, namely action (praxis ) and speech (lexis), out of 
which rises the realm of human affairs (ta ton anthropon pragmata, 
as Plato used to call it) from which everything merely necessary 
or useful is strictly excluded. 

However, while certainly only the foundation of the city-state 
enabled men to spend their whole lives in the political realm, in 
action and speech, the conviction that these two human capacities 
belonged together and are the highest of all seems to have preceded 
the polis and was already present in pre-Socratic thought. The 
stature of the Homeric Achilles can be understood only if one 
sees him as “the doer of great deeds and the speaker of great 
words .” In distinction from modern understanding, such words 
were not considered to be great because they expressed great 
thoughts; on the contrary, as we know from the last lines of 
Antigone, it may be the capacity for “great words” ( megaloi logoi) 
with which to reply to striking blows that will eventually teach 
thought in old age. Thought was secondary to speech, but 

[ 25 ] 

speech and action were considered to be coeval and coequal, of the 
same rank and the same kind; and this originally meant not only 
that most political action, in so far as it remains outside the sphere 
of violence, is indeed transacted in words, but more fundamentally 
that finding the right words at the right moment, quite apart from 
the information or communication they may convey, is action. 
Only sheer violence is mute, and for this reason violence alone 
can never be great. Even when, relatively late in antiquity, the 
arts of war and speech ( rhetoric ) emerged as the two principal 
political subjects of education, the development was still inspired 
by this older pr e-polis experience and tradition and remained sub- 
ject to it. 

In the experience of the polis, which not without justification 
has been called the most talkative of all bodies politic, and even 
more in the political philosophy which sprang from it, action and 
speech separated and became more and more independent activi- 
ties. The emphasis shifted from action to speech, and to speech as 
a means of persuasion rather than the specifically human way of 
answering, talking back and measuring up to whatever happened 
or was done . To be political, to live in a polis, meant that every- 
thing was decided through words and persuasion and not through 
force and violence. In Greek self-understanding, to force people 


[ 26 ] 

by violence, to command rather than persuade, were prepolitical 
ways to deal with people characteristic of life outside the polls, of 
home and family life, where the household head ruled with uncon- 
tested, despotic powers, or of life in the barbarian empires of Asia, 
whose despotism was frequently likened to the organization of the 
household. 

Aristotle’s definition of man as zoon politikon was not only un- 
related and even opposed to the natural association experienced 
in household life; it can be fully understood only if one adds his 
second famous definition of man as a zoon logon ekhon (“a living 
being capable of speech”) . The Latin translation of this term into 
animal rationale rests on no less fundamental a misunderstanding 
than the term “social animal.” Aristotle meant neither to define 
man in general nor to indicate man’s highest capacity, which to 
him was not logos , that is, not speech or reason, but nous , the 
capacity of contemplation, whose chief characteristic is that its 
content cannot be rendered in speech . In his two most famous 
definitions, Aristotle only formulated the current opinion of the 
polls about man and the political way of life, and according to this 
opinion, everybody outside the polls — slaves and barbarians— was 
aneu logou , deprived, of course, not of the faculty of speech, but of 
a way of life in which speech and only speech made sense and 
where the central concern of all citizens was to talk with each 
other. 

The profound misunderstanding expressed in the Latin transla- 
tion of “political” as “social” is perhaps nowhere clearer than in 
a discussion in wLich Thomas Aquinas compares the nature of 
household rule with political rule: the head of the household, he 
finds, has some similarity to the head of the kingdom, but, he adds, 
his power is not so “perfect” as that of the king . Not only in 
Greece and the polls but throughout the whole of occidental an- 
tiquity, it would indeed have been self-evident that even the power 
of the tyrant was less great, less “perfect” than the power with 
which the paterfamilias , the domlnus , ruled over his household of 
slaves and family. And this was not because the power of the city’s 

[ 27 ] 


ruler was matched and checked by the combined powers of house- 
hold heads, but because absolute, uncontested rule and a political 
realm properly speaking were mutually exclusive.


[[[ The Polis and the Household ]]]

Although misunderstanding and equating the political and social 
realms is as old as the translation of Greek terms into Latin and 
their adaption to Roman-Christian thought, it has become even 
more confusing in modern usage and modem understanding of 
society. The distinction between a private and a public sphere of 
life corresponds to the household and the political realms, which 
have existed as distinct, separate entities at least since the rise of 
the ancient city-state; but the emergence of the social realm, 
which is neither private nor public, strictly speaking, is a rela- 
tively new phenomenon whose origin coincided with the emer- 
gence of the modern age and which found its political form in the 
nation-state. 

What concerns us in this context is the extraordinary difficulty 
with which we, because of this development, understand the deci- 
sive division between the public and private realms, between the 
sphere of the polls and the sphere of household and family, and, 
finally, between activities related to a common world and those 
related to the maintenance of life, a division upon which all 
ancient political thought rested as self-evident and axiomatic. In 
our understanding, the dividing line is entirely blurred, because 
we see the body of peoples and political communities in the image 
of a family whose everyday affairs have to be taken care of by a 
gigantic, nation-wide administration of housekeeping. The scien- 
tific thought that corresponds to this development is no longer 
political science but “national economy” or “social economy” or 
Volkswirtschaft, all of which indicate a kind of “collective house- 

[ 25 ] 

keeping ”; the collective of families economically organized into 
the facsimile of one super-human family is what we call “society,” 
and its political form of organization is called “nation .” We 
therefore find it difficult to realize that according to ancient 
thought on these matters, the very term “political economy” 
would have been a contradiction in terms: whatever was “eco- 
nomic,” related to the life of the individual and the survival of the 
species, was a non-political, household affair by definition.

Historically, it is very likely that the rise of the city-state and 
the public realm occurred at the expense of the private realm of 
family and household. Yet the old sanctity of the hearth, though 
much less pronounced in classical Greece than in ancient Rome, 
was never entirely lost. What prevented the polls from violating 
the private lives of its citizens and made it hold sacred the bound- 
aries surrounding each property was not respect for private prop- 
erty as we understand it, but the fact that without owning a house 


[ 26 ]

a man could not participate in the affairs of the world because he 
had no location in it which was properly his own. Even Plato, 
whose political plans foresaw the abolition of private property 
and an extension of the public sphere to the point of annihilating 
private life altogether, still speaks with great reverence of Zeus 
Herkeios, the protector of border lines, and calls the horoi, the 
boundaries between one estate and another, divine, without seeing 
any contradiction.

The distinctive trait of the household sphere was that in it men 
lived together because they were driven by their wants and needs. 
The driving force was life itself— the penates, the household gods, 
were, according to Plutarch, “the gods who make us live and 
nourish our body” — which, for its individual maintenance and 
its survival as the life of the species needs the company of others. 
That individual maintenance should be the task of the man and 
species survival the task of the woman was obvious, and both of 
these natural functions, the labor of man to provide nourishment 
and the labor of the woman in giving birth, were subject to the 
same urgency of life. Natural community in the household there- 
fore was born of necessity, and necessity ruled over all activities 
performed in it. 

The realm of the polls , on the contrary, was the sphere of free- 
dom, and if there was a relationship between these two spheres, it 
was a matter of course that the mastering of the necessities of life 

[ 30 ] 


in the household was the condition for freedom of the polls. Under 
no circumstances could politics be only a means to protect society 
— a society of the faithful, as in the Middle Ages, or a society of 
property-owners, as in Locke, or a society relentlessly engaged in 
a process of acquisition, as in Hobbes, or a society of producers, 
as in Marx, or a society of jobholders, as in our own society, or 
a society of laborers, as in socialist and communist countries. In 
all these cases, it is the freedom (and in some instances so-called 
freedom) of society which requires and justifies the restraint of 
political authority. Freedom is located in the realm of the social, 
and force or violence becomes the monopoly of government. 

What all Greek philosophers, no matter how opposed to polls 
life, took for granted is that freedom is exclusively located in the 
political realm, that necessity is primarily a prepolitical phenome- 
non, characteristic of the private household organization, and that 
force and violence are justified in this sphere because they are the 
only means to master necessity — for instance, by ruling over 
slaves — and to become free. Because all human beings are subject 
to necessity, they are entitled to violence toward others; violence 
is the prepolitical act of liberating oneself from the necessity of 
life for the freedom of world. This freedom is the essential condi- 
tion of what the Greeks called felicity, eudaimonia, which was an 
objective status depending first of all upon wealth and health. To 
be poor or to be in ill health meant to be subject to physical neces- 
sity, and to be a slave meant to be subject, in addition, to man- 
made violence. This twofold and doubled “unhappiness” of slavery 
is quite independent of the actual subjective well-being of the slave. 
Thus, a poor free man preferred the insecurity of a daily-changing 
labor market to regular assured work, which, because it restricted 
his freedom to do as he pleased every day, was already felt to be 
servitude ( douleia ), and even harsh, painful labor was preferred to 
the easy life of many household slaves.

[ 31 ] 

The prepolitical force, however, with which the head of the 
household ruled over the family and its slaves and which was felt 
to be necessary because man is a “social” before he is a “political 
animal,” has nothing in common with the chaotic “state of nature” 
from whose violence, according to seventeenth-century political 
thought, men could escape only by establishing a government that, 
through a monopoly of power and of violence, would abolish the 
“war of all against all” by “keeping them all in awe .” On the 
contrary, the whole concept of rule and being ruled, of govern- 
ment and power in the sense in which we understand them as well 
as the regulated order attending them, was felt to be prepolitical 
and to belong in the private rather than the public sphere. 

The polls was distinguished from the household in that it knew 
only “equals,” whereas the household was the center of the strict- 
est inequality. To be free meant both not to be subject to the 
necessity of life or to the command of another and not to be in 
command oneself. It meant neither to rule nor to be ruled . Thus 
within the realm of the household, freedom did not exist, for the 
household head, its ruler, was considered to be free only in so far 
as he had the power to leave the household and enter the political 
realm, where all were equals. To be sure, this equality of the 
political realm has very little in common with our concept of 
equality: it meant to live among and to have to deal only with one’s 
peers, and it presupposed the existence of “unequals” who, as a 
matter of fact, were always the majority of the population in a 
city-state. Equality, therefore, far from being connected with 

[ 32 ] 

justice, as in modem times, was the very essence of freedom: to 
be free meant to be free from the inequality present in rulership 
and to move in a sphere where neither rule nor being ruled 
existed. 

However, the possibility of describing the profound difference 
between the modern and the ancient understanding of politics in 
terms of a clear-cut opposition ends here. In the modern world, 
the social and the political realms are much less distinct. That 
politics is nothing but a function of society, that action, speech, 
and thought are primarily superstructures upon social interest, is 
not a discovery of Karl Marx but on the contrary is among the 
axiomatic assumptions Marx accepted uncritically from the politi- 
cal economists of the modern age. This functionalization makes it 
impossible to perceive any serious gulf between the two realms; 
and this is not a matter of a theory or an ideology, since with the 
rise of society, that is, the rise of the “household” ( oikia ) or of 
economic activities to the public realm, housekeeping and all mat- 
ters pertaining formerly to the private sphere of the family have 
become a “collective” concern . In the modern world, the two 
realms indeed constantly flow into each other like waves in the 
never-resting stream of the life process itself. 

The disappearance of the gulf that the ancients had to cross 
daily to transcend the narrow realm of the household and “rise” 
into the realm of politics is an essentially modern phenomenon. 
Such a gulf between the private and the public still existed some- 
how in the Middle Ages, though it had lost much of its significance 

[ 33 ] 

and changed its location entirely. It has been rightly remarked 
that after the downfall of the Roman Empire, it was the Catholic 
Church that offered men a substitute for the citizenship which 
had formerly been the prerogative of municipal government . The 
medieval tension between the darkness of everyday life and the 
grandiose splendor attending everything sacred, with the con- 
comitant rise from the secular to the religious, corresponds in 
many respects to the rise from the private to the public in antiq- 
uity. The difference is of course very marked, for no matter how 
“worldly” the Church became, it was always essentially an other- 
worldly concern which kept the community of believers together. 
While one can equate the public with the religious only with some 
difficulty, the secular realm under the rule of feudalism was in- 
deed in its entirety what the private realm had been in antiquity. 
Its hallmark was the absorption of all activities into the household 
sphere, where they had only private significance, and conse- 
quently the very absence of a public realm.

It is characteristic of this growth of the private realm, and inci- 
dentally of the difference between the ancient household head and 
the feudal lord, that the feudal lord could render justice within 
the limits of his rule, whereas the ancient household head, while 
he might exert a milder or harsher rule, knew neither of laws nor 
justice outside the political realm. The bringing of all human 

[ 34 ] 

activities into the private realm and the modeling of all human 
relationships upon the example of the household reached far into 
the specifically medieval professional organizations in the cities 
themselves, the guilds, confreries , and compagnons, and even into 
the early business companies, where “the original joint household 
would seem to be indicated by the very word ‘company’ (com- 
pants ) . . . [and] such phrases as ‘men who eat one bread,’ ‘men 
who have one bread and one wine.’ ” The medieval concept of 
the “common good,” far from indicating the existence of a politi- 
cal realm, recognizes only that private individuals have interests 
in common, material and spiritual, and that they can retain their 
privacy and attend to their own business only if one of them takes 
it upon himself to look out for this common interest. What dis- 
tinguishes this essentially Christian attitude toward politics from 
the modern reality is not so much the recognition of a “common 
good” as the exclusivity of the private sphere and the absence of 
that curiously hybrid realm where private interests assume public 
significance that we call “society.” 

It is therefore not surprising that medieval political thought, 
concerned exclusively with the secular realm, remained unaware 
of the gulf between the sheltered life in the household and the 
merciless exposure of the polls and, consequently, of the virtue of 
courage as one of the most elemental political attitudes. What 
remains surprising is that the only postclassical political theorist 
who, in an extraordinary effort to restore its old dignity to poli- 
tics, perceived the gulf and understood something of the courage 
needed to cross it was Machiavelli, who described it in the rise 
“of the Condottiere from low condition to high rank,” from 
privacy to princedom, that is, from circumstances common to all 
men to the shining glory of great deeds. 

[ 35 ]

To leave the household, originally in order to embark upon 
some adventure and glorious enterprise and later simply to devote 
one’s life to the affairs of the city, demanded courage because only 
in the household was one primarily concerned with one’s own life 
and survival. Whoever entered the political realm had first to be 
ready to risk his life, and too great a love for life obstructed free- 
dom, was a sure sign of slavishness. Courage therefore became 
the political virtue par excellence, and only those men who pos- 
sessed it could be admitted to a fellowship that was political in 
content and purpose and thereby transcended the mere together- 
ness imposed on all— slaves, barbarians, and Greeks alike — 
through the urgencies of life. The “good life,” as Aristotle called 
the life of the citizen, therefore was not merely better, more care- 
free or nobler than ordinary life, but of an altogether different 

[ 36 ]

quality. It was “good” to the extent that by having mastered the 
necessities of sheer life, by being freed from labor and work, and 
by overcoming the innate urge of all living creatures for their 
own survival, it was no longer bound to the biological life process. 

At the root of Greek political consciousness we find an un- 
equaled clarity and articulateness in drawing this distinction. No 
activity that served only the purpose of making a living, of sus- 
taining only the life process, was permitted to enter the political 
realm, and this at the grave risk of abandoning trade and manufac- 
ture to the industriousness of slaves and foreigners, so that Athens 
indeed became the “pensionopolis” with a “proletariat of con- 
sumers” which Max Weber so vividly described . The true char- 
acter of this polls is still quite manifest in Plato’s and Aristotle’s 
political philosophies, even if the borderline between household 
and polls is occasionally blurred, especially in Plato who, proba- 
bly following Socrates, began to draw his examples and illustra- 
tions for the polls from everyday experiences in private life, but 
also in Aristotle when he, following Plato, tentatively assumed 
that at least the historical origin of the polls must be connected 
with the necessities of life and that only its content or inherent 
aim ( telos ) transcends life in the “good life.” 

These aspects of the teachings of the Socratic school, which 
soon were to become axiomatic to the point of banality, were then 
the newest and most revolutionary of all and sprang not from 
actual experience in political life but from the desire to be freed 
from its burden, a desire which in their own understanding the 
philosophers could justify only by demonstrating that even this 
freest of all ways of life was still connected with and subject to 
necessity. But the background of actual political experience, at 
least in Plato and Aristotle, remained so strong that the distinction 
between the spheres of household and political life was never 
doubted. Without mastering the necessities of life in the house- 
hold, neither life nor the “good life” is possible, but politics is 
never for the sake of life. As far as the members of the polls are 
concerned, household life exists for the sake of the “good life” in 
the polls. 

[ 37 ] 


[[[The Rise of the Social]]]

The emergence of society — the rise of housekeeping, its activi- 
ties, problems, and organizational devices — from the shadowy in- 
terior of the household into the light of the public sphere, has not 
only blurred the old borderline between private and political, it 
has also changed almost beyond recognition the meaning of the 
two terms and their significance for the life of the individual and 
the citizen. Not only would we not agree with the Greeks that a 
life spent in the privacy of “one’s own” ( idion ), outside the world 
of the common, is “idiotic” by definition, or with the Romans to 
whom privacy offered but a temporary refuge from the business of 
the res publica; we call private today a sphere of intimacy whose 
beginnings we may be able to trace back to late Roman, though 
hardly to any period of Greek antiquity, but whose peculiar 
manifoldness and variety were certainly unknown to any period 
prior to the modern age. 

This is not merely a matter of shifted emphasis. In ancient 
feeling the privative trait of privacy, indicated in the word itself, 
was all-important; it meant literally a state of being deprived of 
something, and even of the highest and most human of man’s 
capacities. A man who lived only a private life, who like the 
slave was not permitted to enter the public realm, or like the bar- 
barian had chosen not to establish such a realm, was not fully 
human. We no longer think primarily of deprivation when we 
use the word “privacy,” and this is partly due to the enormous 
enrichment of the private sphere through modern individualism. 
However, it seems even more important that modern privacy is 
at least as sharply opposed to the social realm — unknown to the 
ancients who considered its content a private matter— as it is to 
the political, properly speaking. The decisive historical fact is 
that modern privacy in its most relevant function, to shelter the 
intimate, was discovered as the opposite not of the political sphere 
but of the social, to which it is therefore more closely and authen- 
tically related. 

The first articulate explorer and to an extent even theorist of 

[ 38 ] 

intimacy was Jean-Jacques Rousseau who, characteristically 
enough, is the only great author still frequently cited by his first 
name alone. He arrived at his discovery through a rebellion not 
against the oppression of the state but against society’s unbearable 
perversion of the human heart, its intrusion upon an innermost 
region in man which until then had needed no special protection. 
The intimacy of the heart, unlike the private household, has no 
objective tangible place in the world, nor can the society against 
which it protests and asserts itself be localized with the same cer- 
tainty as the public space. To Rousseau, both the intimate and the 
social were, rather, subjective modes of human existence, and in 
his case, it was as though Jean-Jacques rebelled against a man 
called Rousseau. The modern individual and his endless conflicts, 
his inability either to be at home in society or to live outside it 
altogether, his ever-changing moods and the radical subjectivism 
of his emotional life, was born in this rebellion of the heart. The 
authenticity of Rousseau’s discovery is beyond doubt, no matter 
how doubtful the authenticity of the individual who was Rousseau. 
The astonishing flowering of poetry and music from the middle 
of the eighteenth century until almost the last third of the nine- 
teenth, accompanied by the rise of the novel, the only entirely 
social art form, coinciding with a no less striking decline of all 
the more public arts, especially architecture, is sufficient testi- 
mony to a close relationship between the social and the intimate. 

The rebellious reaction against society during which Rousseau 
and the Romanticists discovered intimacy was directed first of all 
against the leveling demands of the social, against what we would 
call today the conformism inherent in every society. It is impor- 
tant to remember that this rebellion took place before the prin- 
ciple of equality, upon which we have blamed conformism since 
Tocqueville, had had the time to assert itself in either the social 
or the political realm. Whether a nation consists of equals or 
non-equals is of no great importance in this respect, for society 
always demands that its members act as though they were mem- 
bers of one enormous family which has only one opinion and one 
interest. Before the modern disintegration of the family, this com- 
mon interest and single opinion was represented by the household 
head who ruled in accordance with it and prevented possible dis- 

[ 39 ]

unity among the family members. The striking coincidence of 
the rise of society with the decline of the family indicates clearly 
that what actually took place was the absorption of the family 
unit into corresponding social groups. The equality of the mem- 
bers of these groups, far from being an equality among peers, re- 
sembles nothing so much as the equality of household members 
before the despotic power of the household head, except that in 
society, where the natural strength of one common interest and 
one unanimous opinion is tremendously enforced by sheer num- 
ber, actual rule exerted by one man, representing the common 
interest and the right opinion, could eventually be dispensed with. 
The phenomenon of conformism is characteristic of the last stage 
of this modern development. 

It is true that one-man, monarchical rule, which the ancients 
stated to be the organizational device of the household, is trans- 
formed in society — as we know it today, when the peak of the 
social order is no longer formed by the royal household of an ab- 
solute ruler — into a kind of no-man rule. But this nobody, the 
assumed one interest of society as a whole in economics as well 
as the assumed one opinion of polite society in the salon, does not 
cease to rule for having lost its personality. As we know from the 
most social form of government, that is, from bureaucracy (the 
last stage of government in the nation-state just as one-man rule 
in benevolent despotism and absolutism was its first) , the rule by 
nobody is not necessarily no-rule; it may indeed, under certain 
circumstances, even turn out to be one of its crudest and most 
tyrannical versions. 

It is decisive that society, on all its levels, excludes the possi- 
bility of action, which formerly was excluded from the house- 
hold. Instead, society expects from each of its members a certain 
kind of behavior, imposing innumerable and various rules, all of 
which tend to “normalize” its members, to make them behave, 
to exclude spontaneous action or outstanding achievement. With 

[ 40 ] 

Rousseau, we find these demands in the salons of high society, 
whose conventions always equate the individual with his rank 
within the social framework. What matters is this equation with 
social status, and it is immaterial whether the framework happens 
to be actual rank in the half-feudal society of the eighteenth cen- 
tury, title in the class society of the nineteenth, or mere function 
in the mass society of today. The rise of mass society, on the con- 
trary, only indicates that the various social groups have suffered 
the same absorption into one society that the family units had 
suffered earlier; with the emergence of mass society, the realm of 
the social has finally, after several centuries of development, 
reached the point where it embraces and controls all members of 
a given community equally and with equal strength. But society 
equalizes under all circumstances, and the victory of equality in 
the modern world is only the political and legal recognition of the 
fact that society has conquered the public realm, and that dis- 
tinction and difference have become private matters of the in- 
dividual. 

This modern equality, based on the conformism inherent in 
society and possible only because behavior has replaced action as 
the foremost mode of human relationship, is in every respect dif- 
ferent from equality in antiquity, and notably in the Greek city- 
states. To belong to the few “equals” (, homoioi ) meant to be per- 
mitted to live among one’s peers; but the public realm itself, the 
polls, was permeated by a fiercely agonal spirit, where everybody 
had constantly to distinguish himself from all others, to show 
through unique deeds or achievements that he was the best of all 
( aim ansteuein), The public realm, in other words, was reserved 
for individuality; it was the only place where men could show 
who they really and inexchangeably were. It was for the sake of 
this chance, and out of love for a body politic that made it possible 
to them all, that each was more or less willing to share in the 
burden of jurisdiction, defense, and administration of public 
affairs. 

It is the same conformism, the assumption that men behave and 

[ 41 ] 

do not act with revSpect to each other, that lies at the root of the 
modern science of economics, whose birth coincided with the rise 
of society and which, together with its chief technical tool, statis- 
tics, became the social science par excellence. Economics — until 
the modern age a not too important part of ethics and politics and 
based on the assumption that men act with respect to their econom- 
ic activities as they act in every other respect — could achieve a 
scientific character only when men had become social beings and 
unanimously followed certain patterns of behavior, so that those 
who did not keep the rules could be considered to be asocial or 
abnormal. 

The laws of statistics are valid only where large numbers or 
long periods are involved, and acts or events can statistically 
appear only as deviations or fluctuations. The justification of sta- 
tistics is that deeds and events are rare occurrences in everyday 
life and in history. Yet the meaningfulness of everyday relation- 
ships is disclosed not in everyday life but in rare deeds, just as the 
significance of a historical period shows itself only in the few 
events that illuminate it. The application of the law of large num- 
bers and long periods to politics or history signifies nothing less 
than the wilful obliteration of their very subject matter, and it is 
a hopeless enterprise to search for meaning in politics or signifi- 

[ 42 ] 

cance in history when everything that is not everyday behavior 
or automatic trends has been ruled out as immaterial. 

However, since the laws of statistics are perfectly valid where 
we deal with large numbers, it is obvious that every increase in 
population means an increased validity and a marked decrease of 
“deviation.” Politically, this means that the larger the population 
in any given body politic, the more likely it will be the social 
rather than the political that constitutes the public realm. The 
Greeks, whose city-state was the most individualistic and least 
conformable body politic known to us, were quite aware of the 
fact that the polls , with its emphasis on action and speech, could 
survive only if the number of citizens remained restricted. Large 
numbers of people, crowded together, develop an almost irresist- 
ible inclination toward despotism, be this the despotism of a 
person or of majority rule; and although statistics, that is, the 
mathematical treatment of reality, was unknown prior to the 
modern age, the social phenomena which make such treatment 
possible — great numbers, accounting for conformism, behavior- 
ism, and automatism in human affairs — were precisely those traits 
which, in Greek self-understanding, distinguished the Persian 
civilization from their own. 

The unfortunate truth about behaviorism and the validity of its 
“laws” is that the more people there are, the more likely they are 
to behave and the less likely to tolerate non-behavior. Statistically, 
this will be shown in the leveling out of fluctuation. In reality, 
deeds will have less and less chance to stem the tide of behavior, 
and events will more and more lose their significance, that is, 
their capacity to illuminate historical time. Statistical uniformity 
is by no means a harmless scientific ideal; it is the no longer 
secret political ideal of a society which, entirely submerged in the 
routine of everyday living, is at peace with the scientific outlook 
inherent in its very existence. 

The uniform behavior that lends itself to statistical determina- 
tion, and therefore to scientifically correct prediction, can hardly 
be explained by the liberal hypothesis of a natural “harmony of 
interests,” the foundation of “classical” economics; it was not 
Karl Marx but the liberal economists themselves who had to in- 
troduce the “communistic fiction,” that is, to assume that there is 

[ 43 ] 


one interest of society as a whole which with “an invisible hand” 
guides the behavior of men and produces the harmony of their 
conflicting interests. The difference between Marx and his fore- 
runners was only that he took the reality of conflict, as it pre- 
sented itself in the society of his time, as seriously as the hypo- 
thetical fiction of harmony; he was right in concluding that the 
“socialization of man” would produce automatically a harmony of 
all interests, and was only more courageous than his liberal teach- 
ers when he proposed to establish in reality the “communistic fic- 
tion” underlying all economic theories. What Marx did not — 
and, at his time, could not— understand was that the germs of 
communistic society were present in the reality of a national 
household, and that their full development was not hindered by 
any class-interest as such, but only by the already obsolete 
monarchical structure of the nation-state. Obviously, what pre- 
vented society from smooth functioning was only certain tradi- 
tional remnants that interfered and still influenced the behavior 
of “backward” classes. From the viewpoint of society, these were 
merely disturbing factors in the way of a full development of 
“social forces”; they no longer corresponded to reality and were 
therefore, in a sense, much more “fictitious” than the scientific 
“fiction” of one interest. 

A complete victory of society will always produce some sort 
of “communistic fiction,” whose outstanding political characteris- 
tic is that it is indeed ruled by an “invisible hand,” namely, by 

[ 44 ] 

nobody. What we traditionally call state and government gives 
place here to pure administration — a state of affairs which Marx 
rightly predicted as the “withering away of the state,” though he 
was wrong in assuming that only a revolution could bring it about, 
and even more wrong when he believed that this complete victory 
of society would mean the eventual emergence of the “realm of 
freedom .”

To gauge the extent of society’s victory in the modern age, its 
early substitution of behavior for action and its eventual substitu- 
tion of bureaucracy, the rule of nobody, for personal rulership, it 
may be well to recall that its initial science of economics, which 
substitutes patterns of behavior only in this rather limited field of 
human activity, was finally followed by the all-comprehensive 
pretension of the social sciences which, as “behavioral sciences,” 
aim to reduce man as a whole, in all his activities, to the level of 
a conditioned and behaving animal. If economics is the science of 
society in its early stages, when it could impose its rules of be- 
havior only on sections of the population and on parts of their ac- 
tivities, the rise of the “behavioral sciences” indicates clearly the 
final stage of this development, when mass society has devoured 
all strata of the nation and “social behavior” has become the stand- 
ard for all regions of life. 

Since the rise of society, since the admission of household and 
housekeeping activities to the public realm, an irresistible tenden- 
cy to grow, to devour the older realms of the political and private 
as well as the more recently established sphere of intimacy, has 
been one of the outstanding characteristics of the new realm.This 
constant growth, whose no less constant acceleration we can ob- 
serve over at least three centuries, derives its strength from the 
fact that through society it is the life process itself which in one 
form or another has been channeled into the public realm. The 
private realm of the household was the sphere where the necessi- 
ties of life, of individual survival as well as of continuity of the 
species, were taken care of and guaranteed. One of the character- 


[ 45 ] 

istics of privacy, prior to the discovery of the intimate, was that 
man existed in this sphere not as a truly human being but only as 
a specimen of the animal species man-kind. This, precisely, was 
the ultimate reason for the tremendous contempt held for it by 
antiquity. The emergence of society has changed the estimate of 
this whole sphere but has hardly transformed its nature. The 
monolithic character of every type of society, its conformism 
which allows for only one interest and one opinion, is ultimately 
rooted in the one-ness of man-kind. It is because this one-ness of 
man-kind is not fantasy and not even merely a scientific hypothe- 
sis, as in the “communistic fiction” of classical economics, that 
mass society, where man as a social animal rules supreme and 
where apparently the survival of the species could be guaranteed 
on a world-wide scale, can at the same time threaten humanity 
with extinction. 

Perhaps the clearest indication that society constitutes the public 
organization of the life process itself may be found in the fact that 
in a relatively short time the new social realm transformed all 
modern communities into societies of laborers and jobholders; in 
other words, they became at once centered around the one activity 
necessary to sustain life. ( lb have a society of laborers, it is of 
course not necessary that every member actually be a laborer or 
worker — not even the emancipation of the working class and the 
enormous potential power which majority rule accords to it are 
decisive here — but only that all members consider whatever they 
do primarily as a way to sustain their own lives and those of their 
families.) Society is the form in which the fact of mutual depend- 
ence for the sake of life and nothing else assumes public signifi- 
cance and where the activities connected with sheer survival are 
permitted to appear in public. 

Whether an activity is performed in private or in public is by 
no means a matter of indifference. Obviously, the character of the 
public realm must change in accordance with the activities admit- 
ted into it, but to a large extent the activity itself changes its own 
nature too. The laboring activity, though under all circumstances 
connected with the life process in its most elementary, biological 
sense, remained stationary for thousands of years, imprisoned in 
the eternal recurrence of the life process to which it was tied. The 

[ 46 ]

admission of labor to public stature, far from eliminating its char- 
acter as a process — which one might have expected, remembering 
that bodies politic have always been designed for permanence and 
their laws always understood as limitations imposed upon move- 
ment — has, on the contrary, liberated this process from its cir- 
cular, monotonous recurrence and transformed it into a swiftly 
progressing development whose results have in a few centuries 
totally changed the whole inhabited world. 

The moment laboring was liberated from the restrictions im- 
posed by its banishment into the private realm- and this emanci- 
pation of labor was not a consequence of the emancipation of the 
working class, but preceded it — it was as though the growth ele- 
ment inherent in all organic life had completely overcome and 
overgrown the processes of decay by which organic life is checked 
and balanced in nature’s household. The social realm, where the 
life process has established its own public domain, has let loose 
an unnatural growth, so to speak, of the natural; and it is against 
this growth, not merely against society but against a constantly 
growing social realm, that the private and intimate, on the one 
hand, and the political (in the narrower sense of the word), on the 
other, have proved incapable of defending themselves. 

What we described as the unnatural growth of the natural is 
usually considered to be the constantly accelerated increase in the 
productivity of labor. The greatest single factor in this constant 
increase since its inception has been the organization of laboring, 
visible in the so-called division of labor, which preceded the in- 
dustrial revolution; even the mechanization of labor processes, 
the second greatest factor in labor’s productivity, is based upon it. 
Inasmuch as the organizational principle itself clearly derives from 
the public rather than the private realm, division of labor is pre- 
cisely what happens to the laboring activity under conditions of 
the public realm and what could never have happened in the privacy 
of the household. In no other sphere of life do we appear to have 

[ 47 ] 

attained such excellence as in the revolutionary transformation of 
laboring, and this to the point where the verbal significance of the 
word itself (which always had been connected with hardly bear- 
able “toil and trouble,” with effort and pain and, consequently, 
with a deformation of the human body, so that only extreme 
misery and poverty could be its source), has begun to lose its 
meaning for us. While dire necessity made labor indispensable 
to sustain life, excellence would have been the last thing to expect 
from it. 

Excellence itself, arete as the Greeks, virtus as the Romans 

[ 48 ] 

would have called it, has always been assigned to the public realm 
where one could excel, could distinguish oneself from all others. 
Every activity performed in public can attain an excellence never 
matched in privacy; for excellence, by definition, the presence of 
others is always required, and this presence needs the formality 
of the public, constituted by one’s peers, it cannot be the casual, 
familiar presence of one’s equals or inferiors. Not even the social 
realm — though it made excellence anonymous, emphasized the 
progress of mankind rather than the achievements of men, and 
changed the content of the public realm beyond recognition— has 
been able altogether to annihilate the connection between public per- 
formance and excellence. While we have become excellent in the la- 
boring we perform in public, our capacity for action and speech has 
lost much of its former quality since the rise of the social realm ban- 
ished these into the sphere of the intimate and the private. This 
curious discrepancy has not escaped public notice, where it is 
usually blamed upon an assumed time lag between our technical 
capacities and our general humanistic development or between the 
physical sciences, which change and control nature, and the social 
sciences, which do not yet know how to change and control 
society. Quite apart from other fallacies of the argument which 
have been pointed out so frequently that we need not repeat them, 
this criticism concerns only a possible change in the psychology 
of human beings — their so-called behavior patterns — not a change 
of the world they move in. And this psychological interpretation, 
for which the absence or presence of a public realm is as irrelevant 
as any tangible, worldly reality, seems rather doubtful in view of 
the fact that no activity can become excellent if the world does not 
provide a proper space for its exercise. Neither education nor 
ingenuity nor talent can replace the constituent elements of the 
public realm, which make it the proper place for human excellence. 

[ 49 ] 

[[[The Public Realm: The Common]]]

The term “public” signifies two closely interrelated but not alto- 
gether identical phenomena: 

It means, first, that everything that appears in public can be 
seen and heard by everybody and has the widest possible publicity. 
For us, appearance— something that is being seen and heard by 
others as well as by ourselves — constitutes reality. Compared 
with the reality which comes from being seen and heard, even the 
greatest forces of intimate life — the passions of the heart, the 
thoughts of the mind, the delights of the senses— lead an uncer- 
tain, shadowy kind of existence unless and until they are trans- 
formed, deprivatized and deindividualized, as it were, into a shape 
to fit them for public appearance . The most current of such 
transformations occurs in storytelling and generally in artistic 
transposition of individual experiences. But we do not need the 
form of the artist to witness this transfiguration. Each time we 
talk about things that can be experienced only in privacy or in- 
timacy, we bring them out into a sphere where they will assume 
a kind of reality which, their intensity notwithstanding, they 
never could have had before. The presence of others who see what 
we see and hear what we hear assures us of the reality of the 
world and ourselves, and while the intimacy of a fully developed 
private life, such as had never been known before the rise of the 
modern age and the concomitant decline of the public realm, will 
always greatly intensify and enrich the whole scale of subjective 
emotions and private feelings, this intensification will always come 
to pass at the expense of the assurance of the reality of the world 
and men. 

Indeed, the most intense feeling we know of, intense to the 
point of blotting out all other experiences, namely, the experience 
of great bodily pain, is at the same time the most private and least 

[ 50 ] 

communicable of all. Not only is it perhaps the only experience 
which we are unable to transform into a shape fit for public appear- 
ance, it actually deprives us of our feeling for reality to such an 
extent that we can forget it more quickly and easily than anything 
else. There seems to be no bridge from the most radical subjec- 
tivity, in which I am no longer “recognizable,” to the outer world 
of life . Pain, in other words, truly a borderline experience be- 
tween life as “being among men” ( inter homines esse ) and death, 
is so subjective and removed from the world of things and men 
that it cannot assume an appearance at all.

Since our feeling for reality depends utterly upon appearance 
and therefore upon the existence of a public realm into which 
things can appear out of the darkness of sheltered existence, even 
the twilight which illuminates our private and intimate lives is 
ultimately derived from the much harsher light of the public 
realm. Yet there are a great many things which cannot withstand 
the implacable, bright light of the constant presence of others on 
the public scene; there, only what is considered to be relevant, 
worthy of being seen or heard, can be tolerated, so that the irrele- 
vant becomes automatically a private matter. This, to be sure, 
does not mean that private concerns are generally irrelevant; on 
the contrary, we shall see that there are very relevant matters 
which can survive only in the realm of the private. For instance, 
love, in distinction from friendship, is killed, or rather extin- 
guished, the moment it is displayed in public. (“Never seek to tell 

[ 51 ] 


The Human Condition 


thy love / Love that never told can be.”) Because of its in- 
herent worldlessness, love can only become false and perverted 
when it is used for political purposes such as the change or sal- 
vation of the world. 

What the public realm considers irrelevant can have such an 
extraordinary and infectious charm that a whole people may adopt 
it as their way of life, without for that reason changing its essen- 
tially private character. Modern enchantment with “small things,” 
though preached by early twentieth-century poetry in almost all 
European tongues, has found its classical presentation in the petit 
bonheur of the French people. Since the decay of their once great 
and glorious public realm, the French have become masters in the 
art of being happy among “small things,” within the space of their 
own four walls, between chest and bed, table and chair, dog and 
cat and flowerpot, extending to these things a care and tenderness 
which, in a world where rapid industrialization constantly kills 
off the things of yesterday to produce today’s objects, may even 
appear to be the world’s last, purely humane corner. This enlarge- 
ment of the private, the enchantment, as it were, of a whole people, 
does not make it public, does not constitute a public realm, but, 
on the contrary, means only that the public realm has almost com- 
pletely receded, so that greatness has given way to charm every- 
where; for while the public realm may be great, it cannot be 
charming precisely because it is unable to harbor the irrelevant. 

Second, the term “public” signifies the world itself, in so far 
as it is common to all of us and distinguished from our privately 
owned place in it. This world, however, is not identical with the 
earth or with nature, as the limited space for the movement of 
men and the general condition of organic life. It is related, rather, 
to the human artifact, the fabrication of human hands, as well as 
to affairs which go on among those who inhabit the man-made 
world together. To live together in the world means essentially 
that a world of things is between those who have it in common, 
as a table is located between those who sit around it; the world, 
like every in-between, relates and separates men at the same time. 

The public realm, as the common world, gathers us together 
and yet prevents our falling over each other, so to speak. What 
makes mass society so difficult to bear is not the number of people 

[ 52 ] 

involved, or at least not primarily, but the fact that the world be- 
tween them has lost its power to gather them together, to relate 
and to separate them. The weirdness of this situation resembles a 
spiritualistic seance where a number of people gathered around a 
table might suddenly, through some magic trick, see the table 
vanish from their midst, so that two persons sitting opposite each 
other were no longer separated but also would be entirely un- 
related to each other by anything tangible. 

Historically, we know of only one principle that was ever de- 
vised to keep a community of people together who had lost their 
interest in the common world and felt themselves no longer related 
and separated by it. To find a bond between people strong enough 
to replace the world was the main political task of early Christian 
philosophy, and it was Augustine who proposed to found not only 
the Christian “brotherhood” but all human relationships on chari- 
ty. But this charity, though its worldlessness clearly corresponds 
to the general human experience of love, is at the same time clearly 
distinguished from it in being something which, like the world, is 
between men: “Even robbers have between them [inter rr] what 
they call charity .” This surprising illustration of the Christian 
political principle is in fact very well chosen, because the bond of 
charity between people, while it is incapable of founding a public 
realm of its own, is quite adequate to the main Christian principle 
of worldlessness and is admirably fit to carry a group of essentially 
worldless people through the world, a group of saints or a group 
of criminals, provided only it is understood that the world itself 
is doomed and that every activity in it is undertaken with the pro- 
viso quamdiu mundus durat (“as long as the world lasts ”). The 
unpolitical, non-public character of the Christian community was 
early defined in the demand that it should form a corpus , a “body,” 
whose members were to be related to each other like brothers of 
the same family. The structure of communal life was modeled 

[ 53 ] 

on the relationships between the members of a family because 
these were known to be non-political and even antipolitical. A 
public realm had never come into being between the members of 
a family, and it was therefore not likely to develop from Christian 
community life if this life was ruled by the principle of charity and 
nothing else. Even then, as we know from the history and the 
rules of the monastic orders — the only communities in which the 
principle of charity as a political device was ever tried — the danger 
that the activities undertaken under “the necessity of present life” 

( necessitas vitae praesentis ) would lead by themselves, because they 
were performed in the presence of others, to the establishment of 
a kind of counterworld, a public realm within the orders them- 
selves, was great enough to require additional rules and regula- 
tions, the most relevant one in our context being the prohibition 
of excellence and its subsequent pride. 

Worldlessness as a political phenomenon is possible only on 
the assumption that the world will not last; on this assumption, 
however, it is almost inevitable that worldlessness, in one form 
or another, will begin to dominate the political scene. This hap- 
pened after the downfall of the Roman Empire and, albeit for 
quite other reasons and in very different, perhaps even more dis- 
consolate forms, it seems to happen again in our own days. The 
Christian abstention from worldly things is by no means the only 
conclusion one can draw from the conviction that the human arti- 
fice, a product of mortal hands, is as mortal as its makers. This, 
on the contrary, may also intensify the enjoyment and consump- 

[ 54 ] 

tion of the things of the world, all manners of intercourse in which 
the world is not primarily understood to be the koinon , that which 
is common to all. Only the existence of a public realm and the 
world’s subsequent transformation into a community of things 
which gathers men together and relates them to each other de- 
pends entirely on permanence. If the world is to contain a public 
space, it cannot be erected for one generation and planned for the 
living only; it must transcend the life-span of mortal men. 

Without this transcendence into a potential earthly immortali- 
ty, no politics, strictly speaking, no common world and no public 
realm, is possible. For unlike the common good as Christianity 
understood it — the salvation of one’s soul as a concern common 
to all — the common world is what we enter when we are born 
and what we leave behind when we die. It transcends our life- 
span into past and future alike; it was there before we came and 
will outlast our brief sojourn in it. It is what we have in common 
not only with those who live with us, but also with those who 
were here before and with those who will come after us. But such 
a common world can survive the coming and going of the genera- 
tions only to the extent that it appears in public. It is the publicity 
of the public realm which can absorb and make shine through the 
centuries whatever men may want to save from the natural ruin 
of time. Through many ages before us— but now not any more- 
men entered the public realm because they wanted something of 
their own or something they had in common with others to be more 
permanent than their earthly lives. (Thus, the curse of slavery 
consisted not only in being deprived of freedom and of visibility, 
but also in the fear of these obscure people themselves “that from 
being obscure they should pass away leaving no trace that they 
have existed .”) There is perhaps no clearer testimony to the 
loss of the public realm in the modern age than the almost complete 
loss of authentic concern with immortality, a loss somewhat over- 
shadowed by the simultaneous loss of the metaphysical concern 
with eternity. The latter, being the concern of the philosophers 

[ 55 ]

and the vita contemplativa , must remain outside our present con- 
siderations. But the former is testified to by the current classifica- 
tion of striving for immortality with the private vice of vanity. 
Under modern conditions, it is indeed so unlikely that anybody 
should earnestly aspire to an earthly immortality that we proba- 
bly are justified in thinking it is nothing but vanity. 

The famous passage in Aristotle, “Considering human affairs, 
one must not . . . consider man as he is and not consider what is 
mortal in mortal things, but think about them [only] to the extent 
that they have the possibility of immortalizing,” occurs very prop- 
erly in his political writings . For the polls was for the Greeks, 
as the res publica was for the Romans, first of all their guarantee 
against the futility of individual life, the space protected against 
this futility and reserved for the relative permanence, if not im- 
mortality, of mortals. 

What the modern age thought of the public realm, after the 
spectacular rise of society to public prominence, was expressed 
by Adam Smith when, with disarming sincerity, he mentions 
“that unprosperous race of men commonly called men of letters” 
for whom “public admiration . . . makes always a part of their 
reward . . . , a considerable part ... in the profession of physic; 
a still greater perhaps in that of law; in poetry and philosophy it 
makes almost the whole .” Here it is self-evident that public 
admiration and monetary reward are of the same nature and can 
become substitutes for each other. Public admiration, too, is 
something to be used and consumed, and status, as we would say 
today, fulfils one need as food fulfils another: public admiration 
is consumed by individual vanity as food is consumed by hunger. 
Obviously, from this viewpoint the test of reality does not lie in 
the public presence of others, but rather in the greater or lesser 
urgency of needs to whose existence or non-existence nobody can 
ever testify except the one who happens to suffer them. And 
since the need for food has its demonstrable basis of reality in the 
life process itself, it is also obvious that the entirely subjective 
pangs of hunger are more real than “vainglory,” as Hobbes used 

[ 56 ] 

to call the need for public admiration. Yet, even if these needs, 
through some miracle of sympathy, were shared by others, their 
very futility would prevent their ever establishing anything so 
solid and durable as a common world. The point then is not that 
there is a lack of public admiration for poetry and philosophy in 
the modern world, but that such admiration does not constitute a 
space in which things are saved from destruction by time. The 
futility of public admiration, which daily is consumed in ever 
greater quantities, on the contrary, is such that monetary reward, 
one of the most futile things there is, can become more “objective” 
and more real. 

As distinguished from this “objectivity,” whose only basis is 
money as a common denominator for the fulfilment of all needs, 
the reality of the public realm relies on the simultaneous presence 
of innumerable perspectives and aspects in which the common 
world presents itself and for which no common measurement or 
denominator can ever be devised. For though the common world 
is the common meeting ground of all, those who are present have 
different locations in it, and the location of one can no more coin- 
cide with the location of another than the location of two objects. 
Being seen and being heard by others derive their significance 
from the fact that everybody sees and hears from a different posi- 
tion. This is the meaning of public life, compared to which even 
the richest and most satisfying family life can offer only the pro- 
longation or multiplication of one’s own position with its attend- 
ing aspects and perspectives. The subjectivity of privacy can be 
prolonged and multiplied in a family, it can even become so strong 
that its weight is felt in the public realm; but this family “world” 
can never replace the reality rising out of the sum total of aspects 
presented by one object to a multitude of spectators. Only where 
things can be seen by many in a variety of aspects without chang- 
ing their identity, so that those who are gathered around them 
know they see sameness in utter diversity, can worldly reality 
truly and reliably appear. 

Under the conditions of a common world, reality is not guar- 
anteed primarily by the “common nature” of all men who con- 
stitute it, but rather by the fact that, differences of position and 
the resulting variety of perspectives notwithstanding, everybody 

[ 57 ] 

is always concerned with the same object. If the sameness of the 
object can no longer be discerned, no common nature of men, least 
of all the unnatural conformism of a mass society, can prevent the 
destruction of the common world, which is usually preceded by 
the destruction of the many aspects in which it presents itself to 
human plurality. This can happen under conditions of radical iso- 
lation, where nobody can any longer agree with anybody else, as 
is usually the case in tyrannies. But it may also happen under con- 
ditions of mass society or mass hysteria, where we see all people 
suddenly behave as though they were members of one family, 
each multiplying and prolonging the perspective of his neighbor. 
In both instances, men have become entirely private, that is, they 
have been deprived of seeing and hearing others, of being seen 
and being heard by them. They are all imprisoned in the subjec- 
tivity of their own singular experience, which does not cease to 
be singular if the same experience is multiplied innumerable times. 
The end of the common world has come when it is seen only under 
one aspect and is permitted to present itself in only one perspec- 
tive. 


[[[The Private Realm: Property]]]

It is with respect to this multiple significance of the public realm 
that the term “private,” in its original privative sense, has meaning. 
To live an entirely private life means above all to be deprived of 
things essential to a truly human life: to be deprived of the reality 
that comes from being seen and heard by others, to be deprived 
of an “objective” relationship with them that comes from being 
related to and separated from them through the intermediary of 
a common world of things, to be deprived of the possibility of 
achieving something more permanent than life itself. The priva- 
tion of privacy lies in the absence of others; as far as they are 
concerned, private man does not appear, and therefore it is as 
though he did not exist. Whatever he does remains without sig- 
nificance and consequence to others, and what matters to him is 
without interest to other people. 

Under modern circumstances, this deprivation of “objective” 

[ 58 ] 

relationships to others and of a reality guaranteed through them 
has become the mass phenomenon of loneliness, where it has as- 
sumed its most extreme and most antihuman form . The reason 
for this extremity is that mass society not only destroys the 
public realm but the private as well, deprives men not only of 
their place in the world but of their private home, where they 
once felt sheltered against the world and where, at any rate, even 
those excluded from the world could find a substitute in the 
warmth of the hearth and the limited reality of family life. The 
full development of the life of hearth and family into an inner and 
private space we owe to the extraordinary political sense of the 
Roman people who, unlike the Greeks, never sacrificed the private 
to the public, but on the contrary understood that these two realms 
could exist only in the form of coexistence. And although the 
conditions of slaves probably were hardly better in Rome than in 
Athens, it is quite characteristic that a Roman writer should have 
believed that to slaves the household of the master was what the 
res publica was to citizens . Yet no matter how bearable private 
life in the family might have been, it could obviously never be 
more than a substitute, even though the private realm in Rome 
as in Athens offered plenty of room for activities which we today 
class higher than political activity, such as the accumulation of 
wealth in Greece or the devotion to art and science in Rome. 
This “liberal” attitude, which could under certain circumstances 
result in very prosperous and highly educated slaves, meant only 
that to be prosperous had no reality in the Greek polls and to be 
a philosopher was without much consequence in the Roman 
republic. 

[ 59 ] 

It is a matter of course that the privative trait of privacy, the 
consciousness of being deprived of something essential in a life 
spent exclusively in the restricted sphere of the household, should 
have been weakened almost to the point of extinction by the rise 
of Christianity. Christian morality, as distinguished from its fun- 
damental religious precepts, has always insisted that everybody 
should mind his own business and that political responsibility 
constituted first of all a burden, undertaken exclusively for the 
sake of the well-being and salvation of those it freed from worry 
about public affairs . It is surprising that this attitude should have 
survived into the secular modern age to such an extent that Karl 
Marx, who in this as in other respects only summed up, concep- 
tualized, and transformed into a program the underlying assump- 
tions of two hundred years of modernity, could eventually predict 
and hope for the “withering away” of the whole public realm. The 
difference between the Christian and socialist viewpoints in this 
respect, the one viewing government as a necessary evil because 
of man’s sinfulness and the other hoping to abolish it eventually, 
is not a difference in estimate of the public sphere itself, but of 
human nature. What is impossible to perceive from either point 
of view is that Marx’s “withering away of the state” had been 
preceded by a withering away of the public realm, or rather by 
its transformation into a very restricted sphere of government; in 
Marx’s day, this government had already begun to wither further, 
that is, to be transformed into a nation-wide “housekeeping,” 
until in our own day it has begun to disappear altogether into the 
even more restricted, impersonal sphere of administration. 

It seems to be in the nature of the relationship between the 
public and private realms that the final stage of the disappearance 

[ 60 ] 

of the public realm should be accompanied by the threatened 
liquidation of the private realm as well. Nor is it an accident that 
the whole discussion has eventually turned into an argument about 
the desirability or undesirability of privately owned property. For 
the word “private” in connection with property, even in terms of 
ancient political thought, immediately loses its privative charac- 
ter and much of its opposition to the public realm in general; 
property apparently possesses certain qualifications which, 
though lying in the private realm, were always thought to be of 
utmost importance to the political body. 

The profound connection between private and public, manifest 
on its most elementary level in the question of private property, is 
likely to be misunderstood today because of the modern equation 
of property and wealth on one side and propertylessness and 
poverty on the other. This misunderstanding is all the more annoy- 
ing as both, property as well as wealth, are historically of greater 
relevance to the public realm than any other private matter or 
concern and have played, at least formally, more or less the same 
role as the chief condition for admission to the public realm and 
full-fledged citizenship. It is therefore easy to forget that wealth 
and property, far from being the same, are of an entirely different 
nature. The present emergence everywhere of actually or poten- 
tially very wealthy societies which at the same time are essentially 
propertyless, because the wealth of any single individual consists 
of his share in the annual income of society as a whole, clearly 
shows how little these two things are connected. 

Prior to the modern age, which began with the expropriation 
of the poor and then proceeded to emancipate the new propertyless 
classes, all civilizations have rested upon the sacredness of private 
property. Wealth, on the contrary, whether privately owned or 
publicly distributed, had never been sacred before. Originally, 
property meant no more or less than to have one’s location in a 
particular part of the world and therefore to belong to the body 
politic, that is, to be the head of one of the families which together 
constituted the public realm. This piece of privately owned world 
was so completely identical with the family who owned it that 

[ 61 ] 

the expulsion of a citizen could mean not merely the confiscation 
of his estate but the actual destruction of the building itself . The 
wealth of a foreigner or a slave was under no circumstances a 
substitute for this property , and poverty did not deprive the 
head of a family of this location in the world and the citizenship 
resulting from it. In early times, if he happened to lose his loca- 
tion, he almost automatically lost his citizenship and the protec- 
tion of the law as well . The sacredness of this privacy was like 
the sacredness of the hidden, namely, of birth and death, the begin- 
ning and end of the mortals who, like all living creatures, grow 
out of and return to the darkness of an underworld . The non- 
privative trait of the household realm originally lay in its being 
the realm of birth and death which must be hidden from the public 
realm because it harbors the things hidden from human eyes and 


[ 62 ] 

impenetrable to human knowledge . It is hidden because man 
does not know where he comes from when he is born and where 
he goes when he dies. 

Not the interior of this realm, which remains hidden and of no 
public significance, but its exterior appearance is important for 
the city as well, and it appears in the realm of the city through 
the boundaries between one household and the other. The law 
originally was identified with this boundary line , which in an- 
cient times was still actually a space, a kind of no man’s land 
between the private and the public, sheltering and protecting both 
realms while, at the same time, separating them from each other. 
The law of the polls, to be sure, transcended this ancient under- 
standing from which, however, it retained its original spatial sig- 
nificance. The law of the city-state was neither the content of 
political action (the idea that political activity is primarily legis- 
lating, though Roman in origin, is essentially modern and found 
its greatest expession in Kant’s political philosophy) nor was it a 
catalogue of prohibitions, resting, as all modern laws still do, upon 
the Thou Shalt Nots of the Decalogue. It was quite literally a 

[ 63 ] 

wall, without which there might have been an agglomeration of 
houses, a town ( asty ), but not a city, a political community. This 
wall-like law was sacred, but only the inclosure was political. 
Without it a public realm could no more exist than a piece of 
property without a fence to hedge it in; the one harbored and 
inclosed political life as the other sheltered and protected the 
biological life process of the family.

It is therefore not really accurate to say that private property, 
prior to the modern age, was thought to be a self-evident condi- 
tion for admission to the public realm; it is much more than that. 
Privacy was like the other, the dark and hidden side of the public 
realm, and while to be political meant to attain the highest possi- 
bility of human existence, to have no private place of one’s own 
(like a slave) meant to be no longer human. 

Of an altogether different and historically later origin is the 
political significance of private wealth from which one draws the 
means of one’s livelihood. We mentioned earlier the ancient iden- 
tification of necessity with the private realm of the household, 
where each had to master the necessities of life for himself. The 
free man, who disposed of his own privacy and was not, like a 
slave, at the disposition of a master, could still be “forced” by 
poverty. Poverty forces the free man to act like a slave. Private 
wealth, therefore, became a condition for admission to public life 
not because its owner was engaged in accumulating it but, on the 
contrary, because it assured with reasonable certainty that its 
owner would not have to engage in providing for himself the 

[ 64 ] 

means of use and consumption and was free for public activity. 
Public life, obviously, was possible only after the much more 
urgent needs of life itself had been taken care of. The means to 
take care of them was labor, and the wealth of a person therefore 
was frequently counted in terms of the number of laborers, that 
is, slaves, he owned. To own property meant here to be master 
over one’s own necessities of life and therefore potentially to be 
a free person, free to transcend his own life and enter the world 
all have in common. 

Only with the emergence of such a common world in concrete 
tangibility, that is, with the rise of the city-state, could this kind 
of private ownership acquire its eminent political significance, and 
it is therefore almost a matter of course that the famous “disdain 
for menial occupations” is not yet to be found in the Homeric 
world. If the property-owner chose to enlarge his property in- 
stead of using it up in leading a political life, it was as though he 
willingly sacrificed his freedom and became voluntarily what the 
slave was against his own will, a servant of necessity. 

[ 65 ]

Up to the beginning of the modern age, this kind of property 
had never been held to be sacred, and only where wealth as the 
source of income coincided with the piece of land on which a 
family was located, that is, in an essentially agricultural society, 
could these two types of property coincide to such an extent that 
all property assumed the character of sacredness. Modern advo- 
cates of private property, at any rate, who unanimously under- 
stand it as privately owned wealth and nothing else, have little 
cause to appeal to a tradition according to which there could be 
no free public realm without a proper establishment and protection 
of privacy. For the enormous and still proceeding accumulation of 
wealth in modern society, which was started by expropriation— 
the expropriation of the peasant classes which in turn was the 
almost accidental consequence of the expropriation of Church and 
monastic property after the Reformation — has never shown 

[ 66 ] 

much consideration for private property but has sacrificed it 
whenever it came into conflict with the accumulation of wealth. 
Proudhon’s dictum that property is theft has a solid basis of truth 
in the origins of modern capitalism; it is all the more significant 
that even Proudhon hesitated to accept the doubtful remedy of 
general expropriation, because he knew quite well that the aboli- 
tion of private property, while it might cure the evil of poverty, 
was only too likely to invite the greater evil of tyranny . Since 
he did not distinguish between property and wealth, his two in- 
sights appear in his work like contradictions, which in fact they 
are not. Individual appropriation of wealth will in the long run 
respect private property no more than socialization of the ac- 
cumulation process. It is not an invention of Karl Marx but 
actually in the very nature of this society itself that privacy in 
every sense can only hinder the development of social “produc- 
tivity” and that considerations of private ownership therefore 
should be overruled in favor of the ever-increasing process of 
social wealth.

[ 67 ] 

[[[The Social And The Private]]]

What we called earlier the rise of the social coincided historically 
with the transformation of the private care for private property 
into a public concern. Society, when it first entered the public 
realm, assumed the disguise of an organization of property-owners 
who, instead of claiming access to the public realm because of 
their wealth, demanded protection from it for the accumulation 
of more wealth. In the words of Bodin, government belonged to 
kings and property to subjects, so that it was the duty of the kings 
to rule in the interest of their subjects’ property. “The common- 
wealth,” as has recently been pointed out, “largely existed for 
the common wealth.”

When this common wealth, the result of activities formerly 
banished to the privacy of the households, was permitted to take 
over the public realm, private possessions — which are essentially 
much less permanent and much more vulnerable to the mortality 
of their owners than the common world, which always grows out 
of the past and is intended to last for future generations — began 
to undermine the durability of the world. It is true that wealth 
can be accumulated to a point where no individual life-span can 
use it up, so that the family rather than the individual becomes 
its owner. Yet wealth remains something to be used and consumed 
no matter how many individual life-spans it may sustain. Only 
when wealth became capital, whose chief function was to gen- 
erate more capital, did private property equal or come close to 
the permanence inherent in the commonly shared world . How- 

[ 68 ] 

ever, this permanence is of a different nature; it is the permanence 
of a process rather than the permanence of a stable structure. 
Without the process of accumulation, wealth would at once fall 
back into the opposite process of disintegration through use and 
consumption. 

Common wealth, therefore, can never become common in the 
sense we speak of a common world; it remained, or rather was 
intended to remain, strictly private. Only the government, ap- 
pointed to shield the private owners from each other in the com- 
petitive struggle for more wealth, was common. The obvious 
contradiction in this modern concept of government, where the 
only thing people have in common is their private interests, need 
no longer bother us as it still bothered Marx, since we know that 
the contradiction between private and public, typical of the initial 
stages of the modern age, has been a temporary phenomenon 
which introduced the utter extinction of the very difference be- 
tween the private and public realms, the submersion of both in 
the sphere of the social. By the same token, we are in a far better 
position to realize the consequences for human existence when 
both the public and private spheres of life are gone, the public 
because it has become a function of the private and the private 
because it has become the only common concern left. 

Seen from this viewpoint, the modern discovery of intimacy 
seems a flight from the whole outer world into the inner subjec- 
tivity of the individual, which formerly had been sheltered and 
protected by the private realm. The dissolution of this realm into 
the social may most conveniently be watched in the progressing 
transformation of immobile into mobile property until eventually 
the distinction between property and wealth, between the fun- 
gibiles and the consumpti biles of Roman law, loses all significance 
because every tangible, “fungible” thing has become an object of 
“consumption”; it lost its private use value which was determined 
by its location and acquired an exclusively social value determined 
through its ever-changing exchangeability whose fluctuation could 
itself be fixed only temporarily by relating it to the common de- 
nominator of money . Closely connected with this social evapora- 

[ 69 ] 

tion of the tangible was the most revolutionary modern contribu- 
tion to the concept of property, according to which property was 
not a fixed and firmly located part of the world acquired by its 
owner in one way or another but, on the contrary, had its source 
in man himself, in his possession of a body and his indisputable 
ownership of the strength of this body, which Marx called “labor- 
power.” 

Thus modern property lost its worldly character and was lo- 
cated in the person himself, that is, in what an individual could 
lose only along with his life. Historically, Locke’s assumption 
that the labor of one’s body is the origin of property is more than 
doubtful; but in view of the fact that we already live under condi- 
tions where our only reliable property is our skill and our labor 
power, it is more than likely that it will become true. For wealth, 
after it became a public concern, has grown to such proportions 
that it is almost unmanageable by private ownership. It is as 
though the public realm had taken its revenge against those who 
tried to use it for their private interests. The greatest threat here, 
however, is not the abolition of private ownership of wealth but 
the abolition of private property in the sense of a tangible, worldly 
place of one’s own. 

In order to understand the danger to human existence from the 
elimination of the private realm, for which the intimate is not a 
very reliable substitute, it may be best to consider those non- 
privative traits of privacy which are older than, and independent 
of, the discovery of intimacy. The difference between what we 
have in common and what we own privately is first that our 
private possessions, which we use and consume daily, are much 
more urgently needed than any part of the common world; with- 
out property, as Locke pointed out, “the common is of no use .” 
The same necessity that, from the standpoint of the public realm, 
shows only its negative aspect as a deprivation of freedom pos- 
sesses a driving force whose urgency is unmatched by the so- 
called higher desires and aspirations of man; not only will it 
always be the first among man’s needs and worries, it will also 
prevent the apathy and disappearance of initiative which so obvi- 

[ 70 ] 

ously threatens all overly wealthy communities. Necessity and 
life are so intimately related and connected that life itself is 
threatened where necessity is altogether eliminated. For the 
elimination of necessity, far from resulting automatically in the 
establishment of freedom, only blurs the distinguishing line be- 
tween freedom and necessity. (Modern discussions of freedom, 
where freedom is never understood as an objective state of human 
existence but either presents an unsolvable problem of subjectivity, 
of an entirely undetermined or determined will, or develops out 
of necessity, all point to the fact that the objective, tangible differ- 
ence between being free and being forced by necessity is no longer 
perceived.) 

The second outstanding non-privative characteristic of privacy 
is that the four walls of one’s private property offer the only reli- 
able hiding place from the common public world, not only from 
everything that goes on in it but also from its very publicity, from 
being seen and being heard. A life spent entirely in public, in the 
presence of others, becomes, as we would say, shallow. While it 
retains its visibility, it loses the quality of rising into sight from 
some darker ground which must remain hidden if it is not to lose 
its depth in a very real, non-subjective sense. The only efficient 
way to guarantee the darkness of what needs to be hidden against 
the light of publicity is private property, a privately owned place 
to hide in.

While it is only natural that the non-privative traits of privacy 
should appear most clearly when men are threatened with depriva- 
tion of it, the practical treatment of private property by premod- 
ern political bodies indicates clearly that men have always been 
conscious of their existence and importance. This, however, did 
not make them protect the activities in the private realm directly, 
but rather the boundaries separating the privately owned from 
other parts of the world, most of all from the common world itself. 
The distinguishing mark of modem political and economic theory, 

[ 71 ] 

on the other hand, in so far as it regards private property as a 
crucial issue, has been its stress upon the private activities of 
property -owners and their need of government protection for the 
sake of accumulation of wealth at the expense of the tangible 
property itself. What is important to the public realm, however, 
is not the more or less enterprising spirit of private businessmen 
but the fences around the houses and gardens of citizens. The 
invasion of privacy by society, the “socialization of man” (Marx), 
is most efficiently carried through by means of expropriation, but 
this is not the only way. Here, as in other respects, the revolu- 
tionary measures of socialism or communism can very well be 
replaced by a slower and no less certain “withering away” of the 
private realm in general and of private property in particular. 

The distinction between the private and public realms, seen 
from the viewpoint of privacy rather than of the body politic, 
equals the distinction between things that should be shown and 
things that should be hidden. Only the modern age, in its rebellion 
against society, has discovered how rich and manifold the realm 
of the hidden can be under the conditions of intimacy; but it is 
striking that from the beginning of history to our own time it has 
always been the bodily part of human existence that needed to be 
hidden in privacy, all things connected with the necessity of the 
life process itself, which prior to the modern age comprehended 
all activities serving the subsistence of the individual and the sur- 
vival of the species. Hidden away were the laborers who “with 
their bodies minister to the [bodily] needs of life ,” and the 
women who with their bodies guarantee the physical survival of 
the species. Women and slaves belonged to the same category and 
were hidden away not only because they were somebody else’s 
property but because their life was “laborious,” devoted to bodily 
functions . In the beginning of the modern age, when “free” 

[ 72 ]

labor had lost its hiding place in the privacy of the household, the 
laborers were hidden away and segregated from the community 
like criminals behind high walls and under constant supervision . 
The fact that the modern age emancipated the working classes 
and the women at nearly the same historical moment must cer- 
tainly be counted among the characteristics of an age which no 
longer believes that bodily functions and material concerns should 
be hidden. It is all the more symptomatic of the nature of these 
phenomena that the few remnants of strict privacy even in our 
own civilization relate to “necessities” in the original sense of 
being necessitated by having a body. 

[[[THE LOCATION OF HUMAN ACTIVITIES]]]

Although the distinction between private and public coincides 
with the opposition of necessity and freedom, of futility and per- 
manence, and, finally, of shame and honor, it is by no means true 
that only the necessary, the futile, and the shameful have their 
proper place in the private realm. The most elementary meaning 
of the two realms indicates that there are things that need to be 
hidden and others that need to be displayed publicly if they are 
to exist at all. If we look at these things, regardless of where we 
find them in any given civilization, we shall see that each human 
activity points to its proper location in the world. This is true for 
the chief activities of the vita activa, labor, work, and action; but 
there is one, admittedly extreme, example of this phenomenon, 
whose advantage for illustration is that it played a considerable 
role in political theory. 

Goodness in an absolute sense, as distinguished from the “good- 
for” or the “excellent” in Greek and Roman antiquity, became 
known in our civilization only with the rise of Christianity. Since 

[ 73 ] 

then, we know of good works as one important variety of possible 
human action. The well-known antagonism between early Chris- 
tianity and the res publica, so admirably summed up in Tertullian’s 
formula: nec ulla magis res aliena qiiam publica (“no matter is more 
alien to us than what matters publicly ”), is usually and rightly 
understood as a consequence of early eschatological expectations 
that lost their immediate significance only after experience had 
taught that even the downfall of the Roman Empire did not mean 
the end of the world . Yet the otherworldliness of Christianity 
has still another root, perhaps even more intimately related to the 
teachings of Jesus of Nazareth, and at any rate so independent of 
the belief in the perishability of the world that one is tempted to 
see in it the true inner reason why Christian alienation from the 
world could so easily survive the obvious non-fulfilment of its 
eschatological hopes. 

The one activity taught by Jesus in word and deed is the activity 
of goodness, and goodness obviously harbors a tendency to hide 
from being seen or heard. Christian hostility toward the public 
realm, the tendency at least of early Christians to lead a life as 
far removed from the public realm as possible, can also be under- 
stood as a self-evident consequence of devotion to good works, 
independent of all beliefs and expectations. For it is manifest that 
the moment a good work becomes known and public, it loses its 
specific character of goodness, of being done for nothing but good- 
ness’ sake. When goodness appears openly, it is no longer good- 
ness, though it may still be useful as organized charity or an act 
of solidarity. Therefore: “Take heed that ye do not your alms 
before men, to be seen of them.” Goodness can exist only when 
it is not perceived, not even by its author; whoever sees himself 
performing a good work is no longer good, but at best a useful 
member of society or a dutiful member of a church. Therefore: 
“Let not thy left hand know what thy right hand doeth.” 

It may be this curious negative quality of goodness, the lack of 
outward phenomenal manifestation, that makes Jesus of Naza- 

[ 74 ]

reth’s appearance in history such a profoundly paradoxical event; 
it certainly seems to be the reason why he thought and taught that 
no man can be good: “Why callest thou me good? none is good, 
save one, that is, God .” The same conviction finds its expression 
in the talmudic story of the thirty-six righteous men, for the sake 
of whom God saves the world and who also are known to nobody, 
least of all to themselves. We are reminded of Socrates’ great in- 
sight that no man can be wise, out of which love for wisdom, or 
philo-sophy, was born; the whole life story of Jesus seems to 
testify how love for goodness arises out of the insight that no man 
can be good. 

Love of wisdom and love of goodness, if they resolve them- 
selves into the activities of philosophizing and doing good works, 
have in common that they come to an immediate end, cancel them- 
selves, so to speak, whenever it is assumed that man can be wise 
or be good. Attempts to bring into being that which can never 
survive the fleeting moment of the deed itself have never been 
lacking and have always led into absurdity. The philosophers of 
late antiquity who demanded of themselves to be wise were absurd 
when they claimed to be happy when roasted alive in the famous 
Phaleric Bull. And no less absurd is the Christian demand to be 
good and to turn the other cheek, when not taken metaphorically 
but tried as a real way of life. 

But the similarity between the activities springing from love ot 
goodness and love of wisdom ends here. Both, it is true, stand in 
a certain opposition to the public realm, but the case of goodness 
is much more extreme in this respect and therefore of greater rele- 
vance in our context. Only goodness must go into absolute hiding 
and flee all appearance if it is not to be destroyed. The philosopher, 
even if he decides with Plato to leave the “cave” of human affairs, 
does not have to hide from himself; on the contrary, under the sky 
of ideas he not only finds the true essences of everything that is, 

[ 75 ] 

but also himself, in the dialogue between “me and myself” (eme 
emautS) in which Plato apparently saw the essence of thought. 
To be in solitude means to be with one’s self, and thinking, there- 
fore, though it may be the most solitary of all activities, is never 
altogether without a partner and without company. 

The man, however, who is in love with goodness can never 
afford to lead a solitary life, and yet his living with others and for 
others must remain essentially without testimony and lacks first 
of all the company of himself. He is not solitary, but lonely; when 
living with others he must hide from them and cannot even trust 
himself to witness what he is doing. The philosopher can always 
rely upon his thoughts to keep him company, whereas good deeds 
can never keep anybody company; they must be forgotten the 
moment they are done, because even memory will destroy their 
quality of being “good.” Moreover, thinking, because it can be 
remembered, can crystallize into thought, and thoughts, like all 
things that owe their existence to remembrance, can be trans- 
formed into tangible objects which, like the written page or the 
printed book, become part of the human artifice. Good works, 
because they must be forgotten instantly, can never become part 
of the world; they come and go, leaving no trace. They truly are 
not of this world. 

It is this worldlessness inherent in good works that makes the 
lover of goodness an essentially religious figure and that makes 
goodness, like wisdom in antiquity, an essentially non-human, 
superhuman quality. And yet love of goodness, unlike love of wis- 
dom, is not restricted to the experience of the few, just as loneli- 
ness, unlike solitude, is within the range of every man’s experience. 
In a sense, therefore, goodness and loneliness are of much greater 
relevance to politics than wisdom and solitude; yet only solitude 
can become an authentic way of life in the figure of the philosopher, 
whereas the much more general experience of loneliness is so con- 
tradictory to the human condition of plurality that it is simply 
unbearable for any length of time and needs the company of God, 
the only imaginable witness of good works, if it is not to annihilate 
human existence altogether. The otherworldiness of religious ex- 
perience, in so far as it is truly the experience of love in the sense 

[ 76 ] 

of an activity, and not the much more frequent one of beholding 
passively a revealed truth, manifests itself within the world itself; 
this, like all other activities, does not leave the world, but must be 
performed within it. But this manifestation, though it appears in 
the space where other activities are performed and depends upon 
it, is of an actively negative nature; fleeing the world and hiding 
from its inhabitants, it negates the space the world offers to men, 
and most of all that public part of it where everything and every- 
body are seen and heard by others. 

Goodness, therefore, as a consistent way of life, is not only 
impossible within the confines of the public realm, it is even de- 
structive of it. Nobody perhaps has been more sharply aware of 
this ruinous quality of doing good than Machiavelli, who, in a 
famous passage, dared to teach men “how not to be good .” 
Needless to add, he did not say and did not mean that men must be 
taught how to be bad; the criminal act, though for other reasons, 
must also flee being seen and heard by others. Machiavelli’s cri- 
terion for political action was glory, the same as in classical 
antiquity, and badness can no more shine in glory than goodness. 
Therefore all methods by which “one may indeed gain power, 
but not glory” are bad. Badness that comes out of hiding is 
impudent and directly destroys the common world; goodness that 
comes out of hiding and assumes a public role is no longer good, 
but corrupt in its own terms and will carry its own corruption 
wherever it goes. Thus, for Machiavelli, the reason for the 
Church’s becoming a corrupting influence in Italian politics was 
her participation in secular affairs as such and not the individual 
corruptness of bishops and prelates. To him, the alternative posed 
by the problem of religious rule over the secular realm was in- 
escapably this : either the public realm corrupted the religious body 
and thereby became itself corrupt, or the religious body re- 
mained uncorrupt and destroyed the public realm altogether. A 
reformed Church therefore was even more dangerous in Machia- 
velli’s eyes, and he looked with great respect but greater apprehen- 
sion upon the religious revival of his time, the “new orders” 
which, by “saving religion from being destroyed by the licentious- 

[ 77 ] 

ness of the prelates and heads of the Church,” teach people to be 
good and not “to resist evil”— with the result that “wicked rulers 
do as much evil as they please .”

We chose the admittedly extreme example of doing good works, 
extreme because this activity is not even at home in the realm of 
privacy, in order to indicate that the historical judgments of politi- 
cal communities, by which each determined which of the activities 
of the vita activa should be shown in public and which be hidden in 
privacy, may have their correspondence in the nature of these 
activities themselves. By raising this question, I do not intend to 
attempt an exhaustive analysis of the activities of the vita activa, 
whose articulations have been curiously neglected by a tradition 
which considered it chiefly from the standpoint of the vita contem- 
plativa, but to try to determine with some measure of assurance 
their political significance. 

[ 78 ] 

[[Chapter III: Labor]]

In the following chapter, Karl Marx will be criticized. This is 
unfortunate at a time when so many writers who once made their 
living by explicit or tacit borrowing from the great wealth of 
Marxian ideas and insights have decided to become professional 
anti-Marxists, in the process of which one of them even discovered 
that Karl Marx himself was unable to make a living, forgetting for 
the moment the generations of authors whom he has “supported.” 
In this difficulty, I may recall a statement Benjamin Constant made 
when he felt compelled to attack Rousseau: “J’eviterai certes de 
me joindre aux detracteurs d’un grand homme. Quand le hasard 
fait qu’en apparence je me rencontre avec eux sur un seul point, je 
suis en defiance de moi-meme; et pour me consoler de paraitre un 
instant de leur avis . . . j’ai besoin de desavouer et de fletrir, autant 
qu’il est en moi, ces pretendus auxiliaires.” (“Certainly, I shall 
avoid the company of detractors of a great man. If I happen to 
agree with them on a single point I grow suspicious of myself; 
and in order to console myself for having seemed to be of their 
opinion ... I feel I must disavow and keep these false friends 
away from me as much as I can.”)

[[[The Labor of our Body and the Work of Our Hands]]]

The distinction between labor and work which I propose is unu- 
sual. The phenomenal evidence in its favor is too striking to be 


[ 79 ] 

ignored, and yet historically it is a fact that apart from a few scat- 
tered remarks, which moreover were never developed even in the 
theories of their authors, there is hardly anything in either the pre- 
modern tradition of political thought or in the large body of mod- 
ern labor theories to support it. Against this scarcity of historical 
evidence, however, stands one very articulate and obstinate testi- 
mony, namely, the simple fact that every European language, an- 
cient and modern, contains two etymologically unrelated words 
for what we have to come to think of as the same activity, and re- 
tains them in the face of their persistent synonymous usage.

Thus, Locke’s distinction between working hands and a laboring 
body is somewhat reminiscent of the ancient Greek distinction 
between the cheirotechn.es , the craftsman, to whom the German 
Handwerker corresponds, and those who, like “slaves and tame 
animals with their bodies minister to the necessities of life ,” or in 
the Greek idiom, to somati ergazesthai, work with their bodies (yet 
even here, labor and work are already treated as identical, since 
the word used is not ponein [labor] but ergazesthai [work]). Only 
in one respect, which, however, is linguistically the most impor- 
tant one, did ancient and modern usage of the two words as 
synonyms fail altogether, namely in the formation of a correspond- 
ing noun. Elere again we find complete unanimity; the word “la- 
bor,” understood as a noun, never designates the finished product, 
the result of laboring, but remains a verbal noun to be classed with 
the gerund, whereas the product itself is invariably derived from 
the word for work, even when current usage has followed the 

[ 80 ] 

actual modern development so closely that the verb form of the 
word “work” has become rather obsolete.

The reason why this distinction should have been overlooked in 
ancient times and its significance remained unexplored seems ob- 
vious enough. Contempt for laboring, originally arising out of a 
passionate striving for freedom from necessity and a no less pas- 
sionate impatience with every effort that left no trace, no monu- 
ment, no great work worthy of remembrance, spread with the 
increasing demands of polls life upon the time of the citizens and 
its insistence on their abstention ( skhole ) from all but political ac- 
tivities, until it covered everything that demanded an effort. Ear- 
lier political custom, prior to the full development of the city-state, 
merely distinguished between slaves, vanquished enemies ( dmoes 
or douloi ), who were carried off to the victor’s household with 
other loot where as household inmates ( oiketai or familiares ) they 
slaved for their own and their master’s life, and the demiourgoi, the 
workmen of the people at large, who moved freely outside the 
private realm and within the public. A later time even changed the 
name for these artisans, whom Solon had still described as sons of 
Athena and Hephaestus, and called them banausoi, that is, men 
whose chief interest is their craft and not the market place. It is 
only from the late fifth century onward that the polls began to 
classify occupations according to the amount of effort required, so 
that Aristotle called those occupations the meanest “in which the 

[ 8I ]

body is most deteriorated.” Although he refused to admit banausoi 
to citizenship, he would have accepted shepherds and painters (but 
neither peasants nor sculptors).

We shall see later that, quite apart from their contempt for labor, 
the Greeks had reasons of their own to mistrust the craftsman, or 
rather, the homo faber mentality. This mistrust, however, is true 
only of certain periods, whereas all ancient estimates of human 
activities, including those which, like Hesiod, supposedly praise 

[ 52 ] 

labor , rest on the conviction that the labor of our body which is 
necessitated by its needs is slavish. Hence, occupations which did 
not consist in laboring, yet were undertaken not for their own sake 
but in order to provide the necessities of life, were assimilated to 
the status of labor, and this explains changes and variations in their 
estimation and classification at different periods and in different 
places. The opinion that labor and work were despised in antiquity 
because only slaves were engaged in them is a prejudice of modern 
historians. The ancients reasoned the other way around and felt it 
necessary to possess slaves because of the slavish nature of all oc- 
cupations that served the needs for the maintenance of life . It was 
precisely on these grounds that the institution of slavery was de- 
fended and justified. To labor meant to be enslaved by necessity, 

[ 83 ] 

and this enslavement was inherent in the conditions of human life. 
Because men were dominated by the necessities of life, they could 
win their freedom only through the domination of those whom 
they subjected to necessity by force. The slave’s degradation was 
a blow of fate and a fate worse than death, because it carried with 
it a metamorphosis of man into something akin to a tame animal. 
A change in a slave’s status, therefore, such as manumission by his 
master or a change in general political circumstance that elevated 
certain occupations to public relevance, automatically entailed a 
change in the slave’s “nature .”

The institution of slavery in antiquity, though not in later times, 
was not a device for cheap labor or an instrument of exploitation 
for profit but rather the attempt to exclude labor from the condi- 
tions of man’s life. What men share with all other forms of animal 
life was not considered to be human. (This, incidentally, was also 
the reason for the much misunderstood Greek theory of the non- 
human nature of the slave. Aristotle, who argued this theory so 
explicitly, and then, on his deathbed, freed his slaves, may not have 
been so inconsistent as moderns are inclined to think. He denied 
not the slave’s capacity to be human, but only the use of the word 
“men” for members of the species man-kind as long as they are 
totally subject to necessity .) And it is true that the use of the 
word “animal” in the concept of animal laborans , as distinguished 
from the very questionable use of the same word in the term animal 
rationale , is fully justified. The animal laborans is indeed only one, 
at best the highest, of the animal species which populate the earth. 

[ 84 ]

It is not surprising that the distinction between labor and work 
was ignored in classical antiquity. The differentiation between the 
private household and the public political realm, between the 
household inmate who was a slave and the household head who 
was a citizen, between activities which should be hidden in pri- 
vacy and those which were worth being seen, heard, and remem- 
bered, overshadowed and predetermined all other distinctions until 
only one criterion was left; is the greater amount of time and effort 
spent in private or in public? is the occupation motivated by cura 
privati negotii or cura rei publicae, care for private or for public 
business? With the rise of political theory, the philosophers over- 
ruled even these distinctions, which had at least distinguished be- 
tween activities, by opposing contemplation to all kinds of activity 
alike. With them, even political activity was leveled to the rank of 
necessity, which henceforth became the common denominator of 
all articulations within the vita activa. Nor can we reasonably ex- 
pect any help from Christian political thought, which accepted the 
philosophers’ distinction, refined it, and, religion being for the 
many and philosophy only for the few, gave it general validity, 
binding for all men. 

It is surprising at first glance, however, that the modern age — 
with its reversal of all traditions, the traditional rank of action and 
contemplation no less than the traditional hierarchy within the 
vita activa itself, with its glorification of labor as the source of all 
values and its elevation of the animal laborans to the position tradi- 
tionally held by the animal rationale — should not have brought forth 
a single theory in which animal laborans and homo faber, “the 
labour of our body and the work of our hands,” are clearly distin- 
guished. Instead, we find first the distinction between productive 
and unproductive labor, then somewhat later the differentiation be- 
tween skilled and unskilled work, and, finally, outranking both 
because seemingly of more elementary significance, the division of 
all activities into manual and intellectual labor. Of the three, how- 
ever, only the distinction between productive and unproductive 
labor goes to the heart of the matter, and it is no accident that the 
two greatest theorists in the field, Adam Smith and Karl Marx, 
based the whole structure of their argument upon it. The very 

[ 85 ] 

reason for the elevation of labor in the modern age was its “pro- 
ductivity,” and the seemingly blasphemous notion of Marx that 
labor (and not God) created man or that labor (and not reason) 
distinguished man from the other animals was only the most 
radical and consistent formulation of something upon which the 
whole modem age was agreed.

Moreover, both Smith and Marx were in agreement with mod- 
ern public opinion when they despised unproductive labor as parasit- 
ical, actually a kind of perversion of labor, as though nothing were 
worthy of this name which did not enrich the world. Marx cer- 
tainly shared Smith’s contempt for the “menial servants” who like 
“idle guests . . . leave nothing behind them in return for their con- 
sumption .” Yet it was precisely these menial servants, these 
household inmates, oiketai or familiares , laboring for sheer sub- 
sistence and needed for effortless consumption rather than for pro- 

[ 86 ] 

duction, whom all ages prior to the modern had in mind when they 
identified the laboring condition with slavery. What they left 
behind them in return for their consumption was nothing more or 
less than their masters’ freedom or, in modern language, their 
masters’ potential productivity. 

In other words, the distinction between productive and unpro- 
ductive labor contains, albeit in a prejudicial manner, the more 
fundamental distinction between work and labor . It is indeed the 
mark of all laboring that it leaves nothing behind, that the result of 
its effort is almost as quickly consumed as the effort is spent. And 
yet this effort, despite its futility, is born of a great urgency and 
motivated by a more powerful drive than anything else, because 
life itself depends upon it. The modern age in general and Karl 
Marx in particular, overwhelmed, as it were, by the unprece- 
dented actual productivity of Western mankind, had an almost ir- 
resistible tendency to look upon all labor as work and to speak of 
the annual laborans in terms much more fitting for homo faber, 
hoping all the time that only one more step was needed to eliminate 
labor and necessity altogether.

No doubt the actual historical development that brought labor 
out of hiding and into the public realm, where it could be organized 

[ 87 ] 


and “divided ,” constituted a powerful argument in the develop- 
ment of these theories. Yet an even more significant fact in this 
respect, already sensed by the classical economists and clearly dis- 
covered and articulated by Karl Marx, is that the laboring activity 
itself, regardless of historical circumstances and independent of its 
location in the private or the public realm, possesses indeed a “pro- 
ductivity” of its own, no matter how futile and non-durable its 
products may be. This productivity does not lie in any of labor’s 
products but in the human “power,” whose strength is not ex- 
hausted when it has produced the means of its own subsistence and 
survival but is capable of producing a “surplus,” that is, more than 
is necessary for its own “reproduction.” It is because not labor it- 
self but the surplus of human “labor power" ( Arbeitskrah ) explains 
labor’s productivity that Marx’s introduction of this term, as 
Engels rightly remarked, constituted the most original and revolu- 
tionary element of his whole system . Unlike the productivity of 
work, which adds new objects to the human artifice, the productiv- 
ity of labor power produces objects only incidentally and is pri- 
marily concerned with the means of its own reproduction; since its 
power is not exhausted when its own reproduction has been se- 
cured, it can be used for the reproduction of more than one life 
process, but it never “produces” anything but life. Through 
violent oppression in a slave society or exploitation in the capi- 
talist society of Marx’s own time, it can be channeled in such a 
way that the labor of some suffices for the life of all. 

From this purely social viewpoint, which is the viewpoint of the 
whole modern age but which received its most coherent and great- 

[ 88 ] 

est expression in Marx’s work, all laboring is “productive, and 
the earlier distinction between the performance of “menial tasks” 
that leave no trace and the production of things durable enough to 
be accumulated loses its validity. The social viewpoint is identical, 
as we saw before, with an interpretation that takes nothing into 
account but the life process of mankind, and within its frame of 
reference all things become objects of consumption. Within a com- 
pletely “socialized mankind,” whose sole purpose would be the 
entertaining of the life process — and this is the unfortunately quite 
unutopian ideal that guides Marx’s theories — the distinction be- 
tween labor and work would have completely disappeared; all 
work would have become labor because all things would be under- 
stood, not in their worldly, objective quality, but as results of 
living labor power and functions of the life process. 

It is interesting to note that the distinctions between skilled and 
unskilled and between intellectual and manual work play no role in 
either classical political economy or in Marx s work. Compared 

[ 89 ] 

with the productivity of labor, they are indeed of secondary im- 
portance. Every activity requires a certain amount of skill, the 
activity of cleaning and cooking no less than the writing of a book 
or the building of a house. The distinction does not apply to dif- 
ferent activities but notes only certain stages and qualities within 
each of them. It could acquire a certain importance through the 
modern division of labor, where tasks formerly assigned to the 
young and inexperienced were frozen into lifelong occupations. 
But this consequence of the division of labor, where one activity is 
divided into so many minute parts that each specialized performer 
needs but a minimum of skill, tends to abolish skilled labor alto- 
gether, as Marx rightly predicted. Its result is that what is bought 
and sold in the labor market is not individual skill but “labor 
power,” of which each living human being should possess approxi- 
mately the same amount. Moreover, since unskilled work is a con- 
tradiction in terms, the distinction itself is valid only for the labor- 
ing activity, and the attempt to use it as a major frame of reference 
already indicates that the distinction between labor and work has 
been abandoned in favor of labor. 

Quite different is the case of the more popular category of man- 
ual and intellectual work. Here, the underlying tie between the la- 
borer of the hand and the laborer of the head is again the laboring 
process, in one case performed by the head, in the other by some 
other part of the body. Thinking, however, which is presumably 
the activity of the head, though it is in some way like laboring — 
also a process which probably comes to an end only with life it- 
self — is even less “productive” than labor; if labor leaves no per- 
manent trace, thinking leaves nothing tangible at all. By itself, 
thinking never materializes into any objects. Whenever the intel- 
lectual worker wishes to manifest his thoughts, he must use his 
hands and acquire manual skills just like any other worker. In 
other words, thinking and working are two different activities 
which never quite coincide; the thinker who wants the world to 
know the “content” of his thoughts must first of all stop thinking 
and remember his thoughts. Remembrance in this, as in all other 
cases, prepares the intangible and the futile for their eventual ma- 
terialization; it is the beginning of the work process, and like the 
craftsman’s consideration of the model which will guide his work, 

[ 90 ] 

its most immaterial stage. The work itself then always requires 
some material upon which it will be performed and which through 
fabrication, the activity of homo faber, will be transformed into a 
worldly object. The specific work quality of intellectual work is 
no less due to the “work of our hands” than any other kind of 
work. 

It seems plausible and is indeed quite common to connect and 
justify the modern distinction between intellectual and manual la- 
bor with the ancient distinction between “liberal” and “servile 
arts.” Yet the distinguishing mark between liberal and servile arts 
is not at all “a higher degree of intelligence,” or that the “liberal 
artist” works with his brain and the “sordid tradesman” with his 
hands. The ancient criterion is primarily political. Occupations in- 
volving prudentia, the capacity for prudent judgment which is the 
virtue of statesmen, and professions of public relevance (ad ho- 
minum utilitatem) M such as architecture, medicine, and agricul- 
ture, are liberal. All trades, the trade of a scribe no less than that 
of a carpenter, are “sordid,” unbecoming for a full-fledged citizen, 
and the worst are those we would deem most useful, such as 
“fishmongers, butchers, cooks, poulterers and fishermen .” But 
not even these are necessarily sheer laboring. There is still a third 
category where the toil and effort itself (the operae as distin- 
guished from the opus , the mere activity as distinguished from the 

[ 91 ] 


work) is paid, and in these cases “the very wage is a pledge of 
slavery .”

The distinction between manual and intellectual work, though 
its origin can be traced back to the Middle Ages , is modern and 
has two quite different causes, both of which, however, are equally 
characteristic of the general climate of the modern age. Since under 
modern conditions every occupation had to prove its “usefulness” 
for society at large, and since the usefulness of the intellectual oc- 
cupations had become more than doubtful because of the modern 
glorification of labor, it was only natural that intellectuals, too, 
should desire to be counted among the working population. At the 
same time, however, and only in seeming contradiction to this de- 
velopment, the need and esteem of this society for certain “intel- 
lectual” performances rose to a degree unprecedented in our his- 
tory except in the centuries of the decline of the Roman Empire. 
It may be well to remember in this context that throughout ancient 
history the “intellectual” services of the scribes, whether they 
served the needs of the public or the private realm, were performed 
by slaves and rated accordingly. Only the bureaucratization of the 
Roman Empire and the concomitant social and political rise of the 
Emperors brought a re-evaluation of “intellectual” services . In so 

[ 92 ]

far as the intellectual is indeed not a “worker”— who like all other 
workers, from the humblest craftsman to the greatest artist, is 
engaged in adding one more, if possible durable, thing to the human 
artifice— he resembles perhaps nobody so much as Adam Smith s 
“menial servant,” although his function is less to keep the life 
process intact and provide for its regeneration than to care for the 
upkeep of the various gigantic bureaucratic machines whose proc- 
esses consume their services and devour their products as quickly 
and mercilessly as the biological life process itself.

[[[The Thing Character of the World]]]

The contempt for labor in ancient theory and its glorification in 
modern theory both take their bearing from the subjective attitude 
or activity of the laborer, mistrusting his painful effort or praising 
his productivity. The subjectivity of the approach may be more 
obvious in the distinction between easy and hard work, but we saw 
that at least in the case of Marx— who, as the greatest of modern 
labor theorists, necessarily provides a kind of touchstone in these 
discussions— labor’s productivity is measured and gauged against 
the requirements of the life process for its own reproduction; it 
resides in the potential surplus inherent in human labor power, not 
in the quality or character of the things it produces. Similarly, 
Greek opinion, which ranked painters higher than sculptors, cer- 
tainly did not rest upon a higher regard for paintings. It seems 

[ 93 ]

that the distinction between labor and work, which our theorists 
have so obstinately neglected and our languages so stubbornly pre- 
served, indeed becomes merely a difference in degree if the worldly 
character of the produced thing — its location, function, and length 
of stay in the world — is not taken into account. The distinction 
between a bread, whose “life expectancy” in the world is hardly 
more than a day, and a table, which may easily survive generations 
of men, is certainly much more obvious and decisive than the dif- 
ference between a baker and a carpenter. 

The curious discrepancy between language and theory which we 
noted at the outset therefore turns out to be a discrepancy between 
the world-oriented, “objective” language we speak and the man- 
oriented, subjective theories we use in our attempts at understand- 
ing. It is language, and the fundamental human experiences under- 
lying it, rather than theory, that teaches us that the things of the 
world, among which the vita activa spends itself, are of a very dif- 
ferent nature and produced by quite different kinds of activities. 
Viewed as part of the world, the products of work — and not the 
products of labor — guarantee the permanence and durability with- 
out which a world would not be possible at all. It is within this 
world of durable things that we find the consumer goods through 
which life assures the means of its own survival. Needed by our 
bodies and produced by its laboring, but without stability of their 
own, these things for incessant consumption appear and disappear 
in an environment of things that are not consumed but used, and to 
which, as we use them, we become used and accustomed. As such, 
they give rise to the familiarity of the world, its customs and habits 
of intercourse between men and things as well as between men and 
men. What consumer goods are for the life of man, use objects are 
for his world. From them, consumer goods derive their thing-char- 
acter; and language, which does not permit the laboring activity to 
form anything so solid and non-verbal as a noun, hints at the strong 
probability that we would not even know what a thing is without 
having before us “the work of our hands.” 

Distinguished from both, consumer goods and use objects, there 

[ 94 ] 

are finally the “products” of action and speech, which together 
constitute the fabric of human relationships and affairs. Left to 
themselves, they lack not only the tangibility of other things, but 
are even less durable and more futile than what we produce for 
consumption. Their reality depends entirely upon human plurality, 
upon the constant presence of others who can see and hear and 
therefore testify to their existence. Acting and speaking are still 
outward manifestations of human life, which knows only one ac- 
tivity that, though related to the exterior world in many ways, is 
not necessarily manifest in it and needs neither to be seen nor heard 
nor used nor consumed in order to be real: the activity of thought. 

Viewed, however, in their worldliness, action, speech, and 
thought have much more in common than any one of them has with 
work or labor. They themselves do not “produce,” bring forth 
anything, they are as futile as life itself. In order to become 
worldly things, that is, deeds and facts and events and patterns of 
thoughts or ideas, they must first be seen, heard, and remembered 
and then transformed, reified as it were, into things— into sayings 
of poetry, the written page or the printed book, into paintings or 
sculpture, into all sorts of records, documents, and monuments. 
The whole factual world of human affairs depends for its reality 
and its continued existence, first, upon the presence of others who 
have seen and heard and will remember, and, second, on the trans- 
formation of the intangible into the tangibility of things. Without 
remembrance and without the reification which remembrance 
needs for its own fulfilment and which makes it, indeed, as the 
Greeks held, the mother of all arts, the living activities of action, 
speech, and thought would lose their reality at the end of each 
process and disappear as though they never had been. The ma- 
terialization they have to undergo in order to remain in the world 
at all is paid for in that always the “dead letter” replaces some- 
thing which grew out of and for a fleeting moment indeed existed 
as the “living spirit.” They must pay this price because they them- 
selves are of an entirely unworldly nature and therefore need the 
help of an activity of an altogether different nature; they depend 
for their reality and materialization upon the same workmanship 
that builds the other things in the human artifice. 

The reality and reliability of the human world rest primarily on 

[ 95 ]

the fact that we are surrounded by things more permanent than the 
activity by which they were produced, and potentially even more 
permanent than the lives of their authors. Human life, in so far as it 
is world-building, is engaged in a constant process of reification, 
and the degree of worldliness of produced things, which all to- 
gether form the human artifice, depends upon their greater or 
lesser permanence in the world itself. 

[[[LABOR AND LIFE]]]

The least durable of tangible things are those needed for the life 
process itself. Their consumption barely survives the act of their 
production; in the words of Locke, all those “good things” which 
are “really useful to the life of man,” to the “necessity of sub- 
sisting,” are “generally of short duration, such as — if they are not 
consumed by use — -will decay and perish by themselves .”After 
a brief stay in the world, they return into the natural process which 
yielded them either through absorption into the life process of the 
human animal or through decay; in their man-made shape, through 
which they acquired their ephemeral place in the world of man- 
made things, they disappear more quickly than any other part of 
the world. Considered in their worldliness, they are the least 
worldly and at the same time the most natural of all things. Al- 
though they are man-made, they come and go, are produced and 
consumed, in accordance with the ever-recurrent cyclical move- 
ment of nature. Cyclical, too, is the movement of the living or- 
ganism, the human body not excluded, as long as it can withstand 
the process that permeates its being and makes it alive. Life is a 
process that everywhere uses up durability, wears it down, makes 
it disappear, until eventually dead matter, the result of small, 
single, cyclical, life processes, returns into the over-all gigantic 
circle of nature herself, where no beginning and no end exist and 
where all natural things swing in changeless, deathless repetition. 

Nature and the cyclical movement into which she forces all liv- 
ing things know neither birth nor death as we understand them. 
The birth and death of human beings are not simple natural oc- 

[ 96 ] 

currences, but are related to a world into which single individuals, 
unique, unexchangeable, and unrepeatable entities, appear and from 
which they depart. Birth and death presuppose a world which is 
not in constant movement, but whose durability and relative per- 
manence makes appearance and disappearance possible, which ex- 
isted before any one individual appeared into it and will survive 
his eventual departure. Without a world into which men are born 
and from which they die, there would be nothing but changeless 
eternal recurrence, the deathless everlastingness of the human as of 
all other animal species. A philosophy of life that does not arrive, 
as did Nietzsche, at the affirmation of “eternal recurrence” (ewige 
Wiederkehr) as the highest principle of all being, simply does not 
know what it is talking about. 

The word “life,” however, has an altogether different meaning 
if it is related to the world and meant to designate the time interval 
between birth and death. Limited by a beginning and an end, that 
is, by the two supreme events of appearance and disappearance 
within the world, it follows a strictly linear movement whose very 
motion nevertheless is driven by the motor of biological life which 
man shares with other living things and which forever retains the 
cyclical movement of nature. The chief characteristic of this spe- 
cifically human life, whose appearance and disappearance consti- 
tute worldly events, is that it is itself always full of events which 
ultimately can be told as a story, establish a biography; it is of this 
life, bios as distinguished from mere zoe, that Aristotle said that it 
“somehow is a kind of praxis .” For action and speech, which, as 
we saw before, belonged close together in the Greek understanding 
of politics, are indeed the two activities whose end result will al- 
ways be a story with enough coherence to be told, no matter how 
accidental or haphazard the single events and their causation may 
appear to be. 

It is only within the human world that nature’s cyclical move- 
ment manifests itself as growth and decay. Like birth and death, 
they, too, are not natural occurrences, properly speaking; they 
have no place in the unceasing, indefatigable cycle in which the 
whole household of nature swings perpetually. Only when they 
enter the man-made world can nature’s processes be characterized 

[ 97 ] 

by growth and decay; only if we consider nature’s products, this 
tree or this dog, as individual things, thereby already removing 
them from their “natural” surroundings and putting them into our 
world, do they begin to grow and to decay. While nature manifests 
itself in human existence through the circular movement of our 
bodily functions, she makes her presence felt in the man-made 
world through the constant threat of overgrowing or decaying it. 
The common characteristic of both, the biological process in man 
and the process of growth and decay in the world, is that they are 
part of the cyclical movement of nature and therefore endlessly 
repetitive; all human activities which arise out of the necessity to 
cope with them are bound to the recurring cycles of nature and 
have in themselves no beginning and no end, properly speaking; 
unlike working , whose end has come when the object is finished, 
ready to be added to the common world of things, laboring always 
moves in the same circle, which is prescribed by the biological 
process of the living organism and the end of its “toil and trouble” 
comes only with the death of this organism.

When Marx defined labor as “man’s metabolism with nature,” 

[ 98 ]

in whose process “nature’s material [is] adapted by a change of 
form to the wants of man,” so that “labour has incorporated itself 
with its subject,” he indicated clearly that he was “speaking 
physiologically” and that labor and consumption are but two stages 
of the ever-recurring cycle of biological life. This cycle needs to 
be sustained through consumption, and the activity which provides 
the means of consumption is laboring. Whatever labor produces 
is meant to be fed into the human life process almost immediately, 
and this consumption, regenerating the life process, produces — or 
rather, reproduces — new “labor power,” needed for the further 
sustenance of the body. From the viewpoint of the exigencies of 

[ 99 ] 

the life process itself, the “necessity of subsisting,” as Locke put 
it, laboring and consuming follow each other so closely that they 
almost constitute one and the same movement, which is hardly 
ended when it must be started all over again. The “necessity of 
subsisting” rules over both labor and consumption, and labor, when 
it incorporates, “gathers,” and bodily “mixes with” the things pro- 
vided by nature , does actively what the body does even more 
intimately when it consumes its nourishment. Both are devouring 
processes that seize and destroy matter, and the “work” done by 
labor upon its material is only the preparation for its eventual 
destruction. 

This destructive, devouring aspect of the laboring activity, to be 
sure, is visible only from the standpoint of the world and in distinc- 
tion from work, which does not prepare matter for incorporation 
but changes it into material in order to work upon it and use the 
finished product. From the viewpoint of nature, it is work rather 
than labor that is destructive, since the work process takes matter 
out of nature’s hands without giving it back to her in the swift 
course of the natural metabolism of the living body. 

Equally bound up with the recurring cycles of natural move- 
ments, but not quite so urgently imposed upon man by “the condi- 
tion of human life” itself, is the second task of laboring — its con- 
stant, unending fight against the processes of growth and decay 
through which nature forever invades the human artifice, threat- 
ening the durability of the world and its fitness for human use. 
The protection and preservation of the world against natural 
processes are among the toils which need the monotonous perform- 
ance of daily repeated chores. This laboring fight, as distinguished 
from the essentially peaceful fulfilment in which labor obeys the 
orders of immediate bodily needs, although it may be even less 
“productive” than man’s direct metabolism with nature, has a 
much closer connection with the world, which it defends against 

[ 100 ] 

nature. In old tales and mythological stories it has often assumed 
the grandeur of heroic fights against overwhelming odds, as in the 
account of Hercules, whose cleaning of the Augean stables is 
among the twelve heroic “labors.” A similar connotation of heroic 
deeds requiring great strength and courage and performed in a 
fighting spirit is manifest in the medieval use of the word: labor, 
travail , arebeit. However, the daily fight in which the human body 
is engaged to keep the world clean and prevent its decay bears little 
resemblance to heroic deeds; the endurance it needs to repair every 
day anew the waste of yesterday is not courage, and what makes 
the effort painful is not danger but its relentless repetition. The 
Herculean “labors” share with all great deeds that they are unique; 
but unfortunately it is only the mythological Augean stable that 
will remain clean once the effort is made and the task achieved. 

[[[LABOR AND FERTILITY]]]

The sudden, spectacular rise of labor from the lowest, most de- 
spised position to the highest rank, as the most esteemed of all 
human activities, began when Locke discovered that labor is the 
source of all property. It followed its course when Adam Smith 
asserted that labor was the source of all wealth and found its cli- 
max in Marx’s “system of labor ,” where labor became the 
source of all productivity and the expression of the very humanity 
of man. Of the three, however, only Marx was interested in labor 
as such; Locke was concerned with the institution of private prop- 
erty as the root of society and Smith wished to explain and to se- 
cure the unhampered progress of a limitless accumulation of 
wealth. But all three, though Marx with greatest force and con- 
sistency, held that labor was considered to be the supreme world- 
building capacity of man, and since labor actually is the most nat- 
ural and least worldly of man’s activities, each of them, and again 
none more than Marx, found himself in the grip of certain genuine 
contradictions. It seems to lie in the very nature of this matter that 

[ 101 ] 

the most obvious solution of these contradictions, or rather the 
most obvious reason why these great authors should have remained 
unaware of them is their equation of work with labor, so that labor 
is endowed by them with certain faculties which only work pos- 
sesses. This equation always leads into patent absurdities, though 
they usually are not so neatly manifest as in the following sentence 
of Veblen: “The lasting evidence of productive labor is its mate- 
rial product — commonly some article of consumption ,” where 
the “lasting evidence” with which he begins, because he needs it 
for the alleged productivity of labor, is immediately destroyed by 
the “consumption” of the product with which he ends, forced, as it 
were, by the factual evidence of the phenomenon itself. 

Thus Locke, in order to save labor from its manifest disgrace of 
producing only “things of short duration,” had to introduce money 
—a “lasting thing which men may keep without spoiling” — a kind 
of deus ex machina without which the laboring body, in its obedience 
to the life process, could never have become the origin of anything 
so permanent and lasting as property, because there are no “du- 
rable things” to be kept to survive the activity of the laboring proc- 
ess. And even Marx, who actually defined man as an animal 
laborans, had to admit that productivity of labor, properly speak- 
ing, begins only with reification (Vergegemtdndlichung) , with “the 
erection of an objective world of things” ( Erzeugung einer ge- 
genstand lichen Welt): n But the effort of labor never frees the labor- 

[ 102 ] 

ing animal from repeating it all over again and remains therefore an 
“eternal necessity imposed by nature .” When Marx insists that 
the labor “process comes to its end in the product,” he forgets his 
own definition of this process as the “metabolism between man and 
nature” into which the product is immediately “incorporated,” 
consumed, and annihilated by the body’s life process. 

Since neither Locke nor Smith is concerned with labor as such, 
they can afford to admit certain distinctions which actually would 
amount to a distinction in principle between labor and work, if it 
were not for an interpretation that treats of the genuine traits of 
laboring as merely irrelevant. Thus, Smith calls “unproductive 
labor” all activities connected with consumption, as though this 
were a negligible and accidental trait of something whose true 
nature was to be productive. The very contempt with which he 
describes how “menial tasks and services generally perish in the 
instant of their performance and seldom leave any trace or value 
behind them ” is much more closely related to premodern opinion 
on this matter than to its modern glorification. Smith and Locke 
were still quite aware of the fact that not every kind of labor “puts 
the difference of value on everything ” and that there exists a kind 
of activity which adds nothing “to the value of the materials which 
[it] works upon .” To be sure, labor, too, joins to nature something 
of man’s own, but the proportion between what nature gives — 
the “good things” — and what man adds is the very opposite in the 
products of labor and the products of work. The “good things” for 
consumption never lose their naturalness altogether, and the grain 
never quite disappears in the bread as the tree has disappeared in 
the table. Thus, Locke, although he paid little attention to his own 
distinction between “the labour of our body and the work of our 

[ 103 ] 

hands,” had to acknowledge the distinction between things “of 
short duration” and those “lasting” long enough “that men might 
keep them without spoiling .” The difficulty for Smith and Locke 
was the same; their “products” had to stay long enough in the 
world of tangible things to become “valuable,” whereby it is im- 
material whether value is defined by Locke as something which 
can be kept and becomes property or by Smith as something which 
lasts long enough to be exchangeable for something else. 

These certainly are minor points if compared with the funda- 
mental contradiction which runs like a red thread through the 
whole of Marx’s thought, and is present no less in the third volume 
of Capital than in the writings of the young Marx. Marx’s attitude 
toward labor, and that is toward the very center of his thought, 
has never ceased to be equivocal . While it was an “eternal neces- 
sity imposed by nature” and the most human and productive of 
man’s activities, the revolution, according to Marx, has not the 
task of emancipating the laboring classes but of emancipating man 
from labor; only when labor is abolished can the “realm of free- 
dom” supplant the “realm of necessity.” For “the realm of freedom 
begins only where labor determined through want and external 
utility ceases,” where “the rule of immediate physical needs” 
ends . Such fundamental and flagrant contradictions rarely occur 


[ 104 ] 

in second-rate writers; in the work of the great authors they lead 
into the very center of their work. In the case of Marx, whose 
loyalty and integrity in describing phenomena as they presented 
themselves to his view cannot be doubted, the important discrep- 
ancies in his work, noted by all Marx scholars, can neither be 
blamed upon the difference “between the scientific point of view of 
the historian and the moral point of view of the prophet” nor on a 
dialectical movement which needs the negative, or evil, to produce 
the positive, or good. The fact remains that in all stages of his 
work he defines man as an animal laborans and then leads him into a 
society in which this greatest and most human power is no longer 
necessary. We are left with the rather distressing alternative be- 
tween productive slavery and unproductive freedom. 

Thus, the question arises why Locke and all his successors, their 
own insights notwithstanding, clung so obstinately to labor as the 
origin of property, of wealth, of all values and, finally, of the very 
humanity of man. Or, to put it another way, what were the experi- 
ences inherent in the laboring activity that proved of such great 
importance to the modern age? 

Historically, political theorists from the seventeenth century 
onward were confronted with a hitherto unheard-of process of 
growing wealth, growing property, growing acquisition. In the at- 
tempt to account for this steady growth, their attention was natu- 
rally drawn to the phenomenon of a progressing process itself, so 
that, for reasons we shall have to discuss later, the concept of 
process became the very key term of the new age as well as the 
sciences, historical and natural, developed by it. From its begin- 
ning, this process, because of its apparent endlessness, was under- 
stood as a natural process and more specifically in the image of the 
life process itself. The crudest superstition of the modern age — 
that “money begets money” — as well as its sharpest political in- 
sight — that power generates power — owes its plausibility to the 
underlying metaphor of the natural fertility of life. Of all human 
activities, only labor, and neither action nor work, is unending, 

[ 105 ] 

progressing automarically in accordance with life itself and outside 
the range of wilful decisions or humanly meaningful purposes. 

Perhaps nothing indicates more clearly the level of Marx’s 
thought and the faithfulness of his descriptions to phenomenal real- 
ity than that he based his whole theory on the understanding of 
laboring and begetting as two modes of the same fertile life proc- 
ess. Labor was to him the “reproduction of one’s own life” which 
assured the survival of the individual, and begetting was the pro- 
duction “of foreign life” which assured the survival of the spe- 
cies. This insight is chronologically the never-forgotten origin of 
his theory, which he then elaborated by substituting for “abstract 
labor” the labor power of a living organism and by understanding 
labor’s surplus as that amount of labor power still extant after the 
means for the laborer’s own reproduction have been produced. 
With it, he sounded a depth of experience reached by none of his 
predecessors— to whom he otherwise owed almost all his decisive 
inspirations — and none of his successors. He squared his theory, 
the theory of the modern age, with the oldest and most persistent 
insights into the nature of labor, which, according to the Hebrew 
as well as the classical tradition, was as intimately bound up with 
life as giving birth. By the same token, the true meaning of labor’s 
newly discovered productivity becomes manifest only in Marx’s 
work, where it rests on the equation of productivity with fertility, 
so that the famous development of mankind’s “productive forces” 
into a society of an abundance of “good things” actually obeys no 
other law and is subject to no other necessity than the aboriginal 
command, “Be ye fruitful and multiply,” in which it is as though 
the voice of nature herself speaks to us. 

The fertility of the human metabolism with nature, growing out 
of the natural redundancy of labor power, still partakes of the 
superabundance we see everywhere in nature’s household. The 
“blessing or the joy” of labor is the human way to experience the 
sheer bliss of being alive which we share with all living creatures, 
and it is even the only way men, too, can remain and swing con- 
tentedly in nature’s prescribed cycle, toiling and resting, laboring 
and consuming, with the same happy and purposeless regularity 
with which day and night and life and death follow each other. 

[ 106 ] 


The reward of toil and trouble lies in nature’s fertility, in the quiet 
confidence that he who in “toil and trouble” has done his part, re- 
mains a part of nature in the future of his children and his children’s 
children. The Old Testament, which, unlike classical antiquity, 
held life to be sacred and therefore neither death nor labor to be an 
evil (and least of all an argument against life ), shows in the 
stories of the patriarchs how unconcerned about death their lives 
were, how they needed neither an individual, earthly immortality 
nor an assurance of the eternity of their souls, how death came to 
them in the familiar shape of night and quiet and eternal rest “in a 
good old age and full of years.” 

The blessing of life as a whole, inherent in labor, can never be 
found in work and should not be mistaken for the inevitably brief 
spell of relief and joy which follows accomplishment and attends 
achievement. The blessing of labor is that effort and gratification 
follow each other as closely as producing and consuming the means 

[ 107 ] 

of subsistence, so that happiness is a concomitant of the process it- 
self, just as pleasure is a concomitant of the functioning of a 
healthy body. The “happiness of the greatest number,” into which 
we have generalized and vulgarized the felicity with which earthly 
life has always been blessed, conceptualized into an “ideal” the 
fundamental reality of a laboring humanity. The right to the pur- 
suit of this happiness is indeed as undeniable as the right to life; it 
is even identical with it. But it has nothing in common with good 
fortune, which is rare and never lasts and cannot be pursued, be- 
cause fortune depends on luck and what chance gives and takes, 
although most people in their “pursuit of happiness” run after good 
fortune and make themselves unhappy even when it befalls them, 
because they want to keep and enjoy luck as though it were an 
inexhaustible abundance of “good things.” There is no lasting hap- 
piness outside the prescribed cycle of painful exhaustion and pleas- 
urable regeneration, and whatever throws this cycle out of balance 
—poverty and misery where exhaustion is followed by wretched- 
ness instead of regeneration, or great riches and an entirely effort- 
less life where boredom takes the place of exhaustion and where 
the mills of necessity, of consumption and digestion, grind an im- 
potent human body mercilessly and barrenly to death — ruins the 
elemental happiness that comes from being alive. 

The force of life is fertility. The living organism is not ex- 
hausted when it has provided for its own reproduction, and its 
“surplus” lies in its potential multiplication. Marx’s consistent 
naturalism discovered “labor power” as the specifically human 
mode of the life force which is as capable of creating a “surplus” as 
nature herself. Since he was almost exclusively interested in this 
process itself, the process of the “productive forces of society,” in 
whose life, as in the life of every animal species, production and 
consumption always strike a balance, the question of a separate 
existence of worldly things, whose durability will survive and 
withstand the devouring processes of life, does not occur to him at 
all. From the viewpoint of the life of the species, all activities in- 
deed find their common denominator in laboring, and the only dis- 
tinguishing criterion left is the abundance or scarcity of the goods 
to be fed into the life process. When every thing has become an 
object for consumption, the fact that labor’s surplus does not 

[ 108 ] 

change the nature, the “short duration,” of the products them- 
selves loses all importance, and this loss is manifest in Marx’s 
work in the contempt with which he treats the belabored distinc- 
tions of his predecessors between productive and unproductive, or 
skilled and unskilled labor. 

The reason why Marx’s predecessors were not able to rid them- 
selves of these distinctions, which essentially are equivalent to the 
more fundamental distinction between work and labor, was not 
that they were less “scientific” but that they were still writing on 
the assumption of private property, or at least individual appropria- 
tion of national wealth. For the establishment of property, mere 
abundance can never be enough; labor’s products do not become 
more durable by their abundance and cannot be “heaped up” and 
stored away to become part of a man’s property; on the contrary, 
they are only too likely to disappear in the process of appropria- 
tion or to “perish uselessly” if they are not consumed “before they 
spoil.” 


[[[The Privacy of Propert and Wealth]]]

At first glance it must seem strange indeed that a theory which so 
conclusively ended in the abolition of all property should have 
taken its departure from the theoretical establishment of private 
property. This strangeness, however, is somewhat mitigated if we 
remember the sharply polemical aspect of the modern age’s con- 
cern with property, whose rights were asserted explicitly against 
the common realm and against the state. Since no political theory 
prior to socialism and communism had proposed to establish an 
entirely propertyless society, and no government prior to the 
twentieth century had shown serious inclinations to expropriate 
its citizens, the content of the new theory could not possibly be 
prompted by the need to protect property rights against possible 
intrusion of government administration. The point is that then, 
unlike now when all property theories are obviously on the defen- 
sive, the economists were not on the defensive at all but on the 
contrary openly hostile to the whole sphere of government, which 

[ 109 ] 

at best was considered a “necessary evil” and a “reflection on hu- 
man nature ,” at worst a parasite on the otherwise healthy life of 
society . What the modern age so heatedly defended was never 
property as such but the unhampered pursuit of more property or of 
appropriation; as against all organs that stood for the “dead” per- 
manence of a common world, it fought its battles in the name of 
life, the life of society. 

There is no doubt that, as the natural process of life is located in 
the body, there is no more immediately life-bound activity than 
laboring. Locke could neither remain satisfied with the traditional 
explanation of labor, according to which it is the natural and in- 
evitable consequence of poverty and never a means of its abolition, 
nor with the traditional explanation of the origin of property 
through acquisition, conquest, or an original division of the com- 
mon world . What he actually was concerned with was appropria- 



[ 110 ] 

tion and what he had to find was a world-appropriating activity 
whose privacy at the same time must be beyond doubt and dispute. 

Nothing, to be sure, is more private than the bodily functions of 
the life process, its fertility not excluded, and it is quite note- 
worthy that the few instances where even a “socialized mankind” 
respects and imposes strict privacy concern precisely such “activi- 
ties” as are imposed by the life process itself. Of these, labor, be- 
cause it is an activity and not merely a function, is the least pri- 
vate, so to speak, the only one we feel need not be hidden; yet it is 
still close enough to the life process to make plausible the argu- 
ment for the privacy of appropriation as distinguished from the 
very different argument for the privacy of property . Locke 
founded private property on the most privately owned thing there 
is, “the property [of man] in his own person,” that is, in his own 
body . “The labour of our body and the work of our hands” 
become one and the same, because both are the “means” to “ap- 
propriate” what “God . . . hath given ... to men in common.” 
And these means, body and hands and mouth, are the natural ap- 
propriators because they do not “belong to mankind in common” 
but are given to each man for his private use.

Just as Marx had to introduce a natural force, the “labor power” 
of the body, to account for labor’s productivity and a progressing 
process of growing wealth, Locke, albeit less explicitly, had to 
trace property to a natural origin of appropriation in order to force 
open those stable, worldly boundaries that “enclose” each person’s 
privately owned share of the world “from the common.” What 
Marx still had in common with Locke was that he wished to see 
the process of growing wealth as a natural process, automatically 
following its own laws and beyond wilful decisions and purposes. 
If any human activity was to be involved in the process at all, it 
could only be a bodily “activity” whose natural functioning could 
not be checked even if one wanted to do so. To check these “activi- 

[ 101 ] 

ties” is indeed to destroy nature, and for the whole modern age, 
whether it holds fast to the institution of private property or con- 
siders it to be an impediment to the growth of wealth, a check or 
control of the process of wealth was equivalent to an attempt to 
destroy the very life of society. 

The development of the modern age and the rise of society, 
where the most private of all human activities, laboring, has be- 
come public and been permitted to establish its own common 
realm, may make it doubtful whether the very existence of prop- 
erty as a privately held place within the world can withstand the 
relentless process of growing wealth. But it is true, nevertheless, 
that the very privacy of one’s holdings, that is, their complete inde- 
pendence “from the common,” could not be better guaranteed than 
by the transformation of property into appropriation or by an in- 
terpretation of the “enclosure from the common” which sees it as 
the result, the “product,” of bodily activity. In this aspect, the 
body becomes indeed the quintessence of all property because it is 
the only thing one could not share even if one wanted to. Nothing, 
in fact, is less common and less communicable, and therefore more 
securely shielded against the visibility and audibility of the public 
realm, than what goes on within the confines of the body, its 
pleasures and its pains, its laboring and consuming. Nothing, by 
the same token, ejects one more radically from the world than 
exclusive concentration upon the body’s life, a concentration forced 
upon man in slavery or in the extremity of unbearable pain. Who- 
ever wishes, for whatever reason, to make human existence en- 
tirely “private,” independent of the world and aware only of its 
own being alive, must rest his arguments on these experiences; and 
since the relentless drudgery of slave labor is not “natural” but 
man-made and in contradiction to the natural fertility of the animal 
laborans , whose strength is not exhausted and whose time is not 
consumed when it has reproduced his own life, the “natural” ex- 
perience underlying the Stoic as well as the Epicurean independ- 
ence of the world is not labor or slavery but pain. The happiness 
achieved in isolation from the world and enjoyed within the con- 
fines of one’s own private existence can never be anything but the 
famous “absence of pain,” a definition on which all variations of 
consistent sensualism must agree. Hedonism, the doctrine that 

[ 112 ] 

only bodily sensations are real, is but the most radical form of a 
non-political, totally private way of life, the true fulfilment of 
Epicurus’ lathe biosas kai me politeuesthai (“live in hiding and do not 
care about the world”). 

Normally, absence of pain is no more than the bodily condition 
for experiencing the world; only if the body is not irritated and, 
through irritation, thrown back upon itself, can our bodily senses 
function normally, receive what is given to them. Absence of pain 
is usually “felt” only in the short intermediate stage between pain 
and non-pain, and the sensation which corresponds to the sen- 
sualists’ concept of happiness is release from pain rather than its 
absence. T he intensity of this sensation is beyond doubt; it is, in- 
deed, matched only by the sensation of pain itself. The mental 
effort required by philosophies which for various reasons wish to 
“liberate” man from the world is always an act of imagination in 
which the mere absence of pain is experienced and actualized into a 
feeling of being released from it.

[ 113 ] 

In any event, pain and the concomitant experience of release 
from pain are the only sense experiences that are so independent 
from the world that they do not contain the experience of any 
worldly object. The pain caused by a sword or the tickling caused 
by a feather indeed tells me nothing whatsoever of the quality or 
even the worldly existence of a sword or a feather. Only an ir- 
resistible distrust in the capacity of human senses for an adequate 
experience of the world — and this distrust is the origin of all 
specifically modern philosophy— can explain the strange and even 


[ 114 ] 

absurd choice that uses phenomena which, like pain or tickling, 
obviously prevent our senses’ functioning normally, as examples of 
all sense experience, and can derive from them the subjectivity of 
“secondary” and even “primary” qualities. If we had no other 
sense perceptions than these in which the body senses itself, the 
reality of the outer world would not only be open to doubt, we 
would not even possess any notion of a world at all. 

The only activity which corresponds strictly to the experience 
of worldlessness, or rather to the loss of world that occurs in pain, 
is laboring, where the human body, its activity notwithstanding, is 
also thrown back upon itself, concentrates upon nothing but its 
own being alive, and remains imprisoned in its metabolism with 
nature without ever transcending or freeing itself from the re- 
curring cycle of its own functioning. We mentioned before the 
twofold pain connected with the life process for which language 
has but one word and which according to the Bible was imposed 
upon the life of man together, the painful effort involved in the 
reproduction of one’s own life and the life of the species. If this 
painful effort of living and fertility were the true origin of prop- 
erty, then the privacy of this property would be indeed as world - 
less as the unequaled privacy of having a body and of experiencing 
pain. 

This privacy, however, while it is essentially the privacy of ap- 
propriation, is by no means what Locke, whose concepts were still 
essentially those of the premodern tradition, understood by private 
property. No matter what its origin, this property was to him still 
an “enclosure from the common,” that is, primarily a place in the 
world where that which is private can be hidden and protected 
against the public realm. As such, it remained in contact with the 
common world even at a time when growing wealth and appropria- 
tion began to threaten the common world with extinction. Prop- 
erty does not strengthen but rather mitigates the unrelatedness to 
the world of the laboring process, because of its own worldly se- 
curity. By the same token, the process character of laboring, the 
relentlessness with which labor is urged and driven by the life 
process itself, is checked by the acquisition of property. In a so- 
ciety of property-owners, as distinguished from a society of la- 

[ 115 ] 

borers or jobholders, it is still the world, and neither natural 
abundance nor the sheer necessity of life, which stands at the center 
of human care and worry. 

The matter becomes altogether different if the leading interest is 
no longer property but the growth of wealth and the process of 
accumulation as such. This process can be as infinite as the life 
process of the species, and its very infinity is constantly challenged 
and interrupted by the inconvenient fact that private individuals do 
not live forever and have no infinite time before them. Only if the 
life of society as a whole, instead of the limited lives of individual 
men, is considered to be the gigantic subject of the accumulation 
process can this process go on in full freedom and at full speed, 
unhampered by limitations imposed by the individual life-span and 
individually held property. Only when man no longer acts as an 
individual, concerned only with his own survival, but as a “member 
of the species,” a Gattungsivesen as Marx used to say, only when 
the reproduction of individual life is absorbed into the life process 
of man-kind, can the collective life process of a “socialized man- 
kind” follow its own “necessity,” that is, its automatic course of 
fertility in the twofold sense of multiplication of lives and the 
increasing abundance of goods needed by them. 

The coincidence of Marx’s labor philosophy with the evolution 
and development theories of the nineteenth century— the natural 
evolution of a single life process from the lowest forms of organic 
life to the emergence of the human animal and the historical devel- 
opment of a life process of mankind as a whole — is striking and was 
early observed by Engels, who called Marx “the Darwin of his- 
tory.” What all these theories in the various sciences — economics, 
history, biology, geology — have in common is the concept of proc- 
ess, which was virtually unknown prior to the modern age. Since 
the discovery of processes by the natural sciences had coincided 
with the discovery of introspection in philosophy, it is only natural 
that the biological process within ourselves should eventually be- 
come the very model of the new concept; within the framework of 
experiences given to introspection, we know of no other process 
but the life process within our bodies, and the only activity into 
which we can translate it and which corresponds to it is labor. 

[ 116 ] 

Hence, it may seem almost inevitable that the equation of produc- 
tivity with fertility in the labor philosophy of the modern age 
should have been succeeded by the different varieties of life phi- 
losophy which rest on the same equation. The difference between 
the earlier labor theories and the later life philosophies is chiefly 
that the latter have lost sight of the only activity necessary to sus- 
tain the life process. Yet even this loss seems to correspond to the 
factual historical development which made labor more effortless 
than ever before and therefore even more similar to the automati- 
cally functioning life process. If at the turn of the century (with 
Nietzsche and Bergson) life and not labor was proclaimed to be 
“the creator of all values,” this glorification of the sheer dynamism 
of the life process excluded that minimum of initiative present even 
in those activities which, like laboring and begetting, are urged 
upon man by necessity. 

However, neither the enormous increase in fertility nor the so- 
cialization of the process, that is, the substitution of society or col- 
lective man-kind for individual men as its subject, can eliminate the 
character of strict and even cruel privacy from the experience of 
bodily processes in which life manifests itself, or from the activity 
of laboring itself. Neither abundance of goods nor the shortening of 
the time actually spent in laboring are likely to result in the estab- 
lishment of a common world, and the expropriated animal laborans 
becomes no less private because he has been deprived of a private 
place of his own to hide and be protected from the common realm. 
Marx predicted correctly, though with an unjustified glee, “the 
withering away” of the public realm under conditions of unham- 
pered development of the “productive forces of society,” and he 
was equally right, that is, consistent with his conception of man as 
an animal laborans , when he foresaw that “socialized men” would 


[ 117 ] 

spend their freedom from laboring in those strictly private and es- 
sentially worldless activities that we now call “hobbies .” 

[[[The Instruments of Work and the Division of Labor]]]

Unfortunately, it seems to be in the nature of the conditions of life 
as it has been given to man that the only possible advantage of the 
fertility of human labor power lies in its ability to procure the 
necessities of life for more than one man or one family. Labor’s 
products, the products of man’s metabolism with nature, do not 
stay in the world long enough to become a part of it, and the labor- 
ing activity itself, concentrated exclusively on life and its main- 
tenance, is oblivious of the world to the point of worldlessness. 
The animal laborans, driven by the needs of its body, does not use 
this body freely as homo faber uses his hands, his primordial tools, 
which is why Plato suggested that laborers and slaves were not 
only subject to necessity and incapable of freedom but also unable 
to rule the “animal” part within them. A mass society of la- 
borers, such as Marx had in mind when he spoke of “socialized 
mankind,” consists of worldless specimens of the species man- 
kind, whether they are household slaves, driven into their predica- 
ment by the violence of others, or free, performing their functions 
willingly. 

This worldlessness of the animal laborans , to be sure, is entirely 
different from the active flight from the publicity of the world 
which we found inherent in the activity of “good works.” The 
animal laborans does not flee the world but is ejected from it in so 
far as he is imprisoned in the privacy of his own body, caught in the 

[ 118 ] 

fulfilment of needs in which nobody can share and which nobody 
can fully communicate. The fact that slavery and banishment into 
the household was, by and large, the social condition of all laborers 
prior to the modern age is primarily due to the human condition 
itself; life, which for all other animal species is the very essence of 
their being, becomes a burden to man because of his innate “re- 
pugnance to futility.” This burden is all the heavier since none of 
the so-called “loftier desires” has the same urgency, is actually 
forced upon man by necessity, as the elementary needs of life. 
Slavery became the social condition of the laboring classes because 
it was felt that it was the natural condition of life itself. Omnis vita 
servitium est.

The burden of biological life, weighing down and consuming the 
specifically human life-span between birth and death, can be elimi- 
nated only by the use of servants, and the chief function of ancient 
slaves was rather to carry the burden of consumption in the house- 
hold than to produce for society at large. The reason why slave 
labor could play such an enormous role in ancient societies and 
why its wastefulness and unproductivity were not discovered is that 
the ancient city-state was primarily a “consumption center,” 
unlike medieval cities which were chiefly production centers. 
The price for the elimination of life’s burden from the shoulders of 
all citizens was enormous and by no means consisted only in the 
violent injustice of forcing one part of humanity into the darkness 
of pain and necessity. Since this darkness is natural, inherent in the 
human condition — only the act of violence, when one group of men 
tries to rid itself of the shackles binding all of us to pain and neces- 
sity, is man-made — the price for absolute freedom from necessity 

[ 119 ] 

is, in a sense, life itself, or rather the substitution of vicarious life 
for real life. Under the conditions of slavery, the great of the earth 
could even use their senses vicariously, could “see and hear 
through their slaves,” as the Greek idiom used by Herodotus 
expressed it. 

On its most elementary level the “toil and trouble” of obtaining 
and the pleasures of “incorporating” the necessities of life are so 
closely bound together in the biological life cycle, whose recurrent 
rhythm conditions human life in its unique and unilinear move- 
ment, that the perfect elimination of the pain and effort of labor 
would not only rob biological life of its most natural pleasures but 
deprive the specifically human life of its very liveliness and vital- 
ity. The human condition is such that pain and effort are not just 
symptoms which can be removed without changing life itself; they 
are rather the modes in which life itself, together with the necessity 
to which it is bound, makes itself felt. For mortals, the “easy 
life of the gods” would be a lifeless life. 

For our trust in the reality of life and in the reality of the world 
is not the same. The latter derives primarily from the permanence 
and durability of the world, which is far superior to that of mortal 
life. If one knew that the world would come to an end with or soon 
after his own death, it would lose all its reality, as it did for the 
early Christians as long as they were convinced of the immediate 
fulfilment of their eschatological expectations. Trust in the reality 
of life, on the contrary, depends almost exclusively on the intensity 
with which life is felt, on the impact with which it makes itself felt. 
This intensity is so great and its force so elementary that wherever 
it prevails, in bliss or sorrow, it blacks out all other worldly real- 
ity. That the life of the rich loses in vitality, in closeness to the 
“good things” of nature, what it gains in refinement, in sensitivity 
to the beautiful things in the world, has often been noted. The fact 
is that the human capacity for life in the world always implies an 

[ 120 ] 

ability to transcend and to be alienated from the processes of life 
itself, while vitality and liveliness can be conserved only to the 
extent that men are willing to take the burden, the toil and trouble 
of life, upon themselves. 

It is true that the enormous improvement in our labor tools — the 
mute robots with which homo faber has come to the help of the 
animal laborans , as distinguished from the human, speaking instru- 
ments (the instrumentum vocale, as the slaves in ancient house- 
holds were called) whom the man of action had to rule and oppress 
when he wanted to liberate the animal laborans from its bondage — 
has made the twofold labor of life, the effort of its sustenance and 
the pain of giving birth, easier and less painful than it has ever 
been. This, of course, has not eliminated compulsion from the la- 
boring activity or the condition of being subject to need and neces- 
sity from human life. But, in distinction from slave society, where 
the “curse” of necessity remained a vivid reality because the life of 
a slave testified daily to the fact that “life is slavery,” this condi- 
tion is no longer fully manifest and its lack of appearance has made 
it much more difficult to notice and remember. The danger here is 
obvious. Man cannot be free if he does not know that he is subject 
to necessity, because his freedom is always won in his never wholly 
successful attempts to liberate himself from necessity. And while it 
may be true that his strongest impulse toward this liberation comes 
from his “repugnance to futility,” it is also likely that the impulse 
may grow weaker as this “futility” appears easier, as it requires 
less effort. For it is still probable that the enormous changes of the 
industrial revolution behind us and the even greater changes of the 
atomic revolution before us will remain changes of the world, and 
not changes in the basic condition of human life on earth. 

Tools and instruments which can ease the effort of labor con- 
siderably are themselves not a product of labor but of work; they 
do not belong in the process of consumption but are part and parcel 
of the world of use objects. Their role, no matter how great it 
may be in the labor of any given civilization, can never attain the 
fundamental importance of tools for all kinds of work. No work 
can be produced without tools, and the birth of homo faber and the 
coming into being of a man-made world of things are actually 
coeval with the discovery of tools and instruments. From the 

[ 121 ]

standpoint of labor, tools strengthen and multiply human strength 
to the point of almost replacing it, as in all cases where natural 
forces, such as tame animals or water power or electricity, and not 
mere material things, are brought under a human master. By the 
same token, they increase the natural fertility of the animal laborans 
and provide an abundance of consumer goods. But all these changes 
are of a quantitative order, whereas the very quality of fabricated 
things, from the simplest use object to the masterwork of art, 
depends intimately on the existence of adequate instruments. 

Moreover, the limitations of instruments in the easing of life’s 
labor — the simple fact that the services of one servant can never be 
fully replaced by a hundred gadgets in the kitchen and half a dozen 
robots in the cellar — are of a fundamental nature. A curious and 
unexpected testimony to this is that it could be predicted thousands 
of years before the fabulous modern development of tools and ma- 
chines had taken place. In a half-fanciful, half-ironical mood, Aris- 
totle once imagined what has long since become a reality, namely 
that “every tool could perform its own work when ordered . . . 
like the statues of Daedalus or the tripods of Hephaestus, which, 
says the poet, ‘of their own accord entered the assembly of the 
gods.’ ” Then, “the shuttle would weave and the plectrum touch 
the lyre without a hand to guide them.” This, he goes on to say, 
would indeed mean that the craftsman would no longer need human 
assistants, but it would not mean that household slaves could be 
dispensed with. For slaves are not instruments of making things or 
of production, but of living, which constantly consumes their serv- 
ices . The process of making a thing is limited and the function of 
the instrument comes to a predictable, controllable end with the 
finished product; the process of life that requires laboring is an 
endless activity and the only “instrument” equal to it would have 
to be a perpetuum mobile , that is, the instrumentum vocale which is 
as alive and “active” as the living organism which it serves. It is 
precisely because from “the instruments of the household nothing 
else results except the use of the possession itself” that they cannot 
be replaced by tools and instruments of workmanship “from which 
results something more than the mere use of the instrument." 

[ 122 ] 

While tools and instruments, designed to produce more and 
something altogether different from their mere use, are of second- 
ary importance for laboring, the same is not true for the other great 
principle in the human labor process, the division of labor. Division 
of labor indeed grows directly out of the laboring process and 
should not be mistaken for the apparently similar principle of spe- 
cialization which prevails in working processes and with which it 
is usually equated. Specialization of work and division of labor 
have in common only the general principle of organization, which 
itself has nothing to do with either work or labor but owes its 
origin to the strictly political sphere of life, to the fact of man’s 
capacity to act and to act together and in concert. Only within the 
framework of political organization, where men not merely live, 
but act, together, can specialization of work and division of labor 
take place. 

Yet, while specialization of work is essentially guided by the 
finished product itself, whose nature it is to require different skills 
which then are pooled and organized together, division of labor, on 
the contrary, presupposes the qualitative equivalence of all single 
activities for which no special skill is required, and these activities 
have no end in themselves, but actually represent only certain 
amounts of labor power which are added together in a purely quan- 
titative way. Division of labor is based on the fact that two men 
can put their labor power together and “behave toward each other 
as though they were one.” This one-ness is the exact opposite of 
co-operation, it indicates the unity of the species with regard to 
which every single member is the same and exchangeable. (The 
formation of a labor collective where the laborers are socially or- 
ganized in accordance with this principle of common and divisible 
labor power is the very opposite of the various workmen’s or- 
ganizations, from the old guilds and corporations to certain types 
of modern trade unions, whose members are bound together by the 
skills and specializations that distinguish them from others.) Since 

[ 123 ] 

none of the activities into which the process is divided has an end in 
itself, their “natural” end is exactly the same as in the case of 
“undivided” labor: either the simple reproduction of the means of 
subsistence, that is, the capacity for consumption of the laborers, 
or the exhaustion of human labor power. Neither of these two limi- 
tations, however, is final; exhaustion is part of the individual’s, not 
of the collective’s, life process, and the subject of the laboring 
process under the conditions of division of labor is a collective 
labor force, not individual labor power. The inexhaustibility of 
this labor force corresponds exactly to the deathlessness of the 
species, whose life process as a whole is also not interrupted by the 
individual births and deaths of its members. 

More serious, it seems, is the limitation imposed by the capacity 
to consume, which remains bound to the individual even when a 
collective labor force has replaced individual labor power. The 
progress of accumulation of wealth may be limitless in a “social- 
ized mankind” which has rid itself of the limitations of individual 
property and overcome the limitation of individual appropriation 
by dissolving all stable wealth, the possession of “heaped up” and 
“stored away” things, into money to spend and consume. We al- 
ready live in a society where wealth is reckoned in terms of earn- 
ing and spending power, which are only modifications of the two- 
fold metabolism of the human body. The problem therefore is how 
to attune individual consumption to an unlimited accumulation of 
wealth. 

Since mankind as a whole is still very far from having reached 
the limit of abundance, the mode in which society may overcome 
this natural limitation of its own fertility can be perceived only 
tentatively and on a national scale. There, the solution seems to be 
simple enough. It consists in treating all use objects as though they 
were consumer goods, so that a chair or a table is now consumed 
as rapidly as a dress and a dress used up almost as quickly as food. 
This mode of intercourse with the things of the world, moreover, 
is perfectly adequate to the way they are produced. The industrial 
revolution has replaced all workmanship with labor, and the result 
has been that the things of the modern world have become labor 
products whose natural fate is to be consumed, instead of work 
products which are there to be used. Just as tools and instruments, 

[ 124 ] 

though originating from work, were always employed in labor 
processes as well, so the division of labor, entirely appropriate and 
attuned to the laboring process, has become one of the chief char- 
acteristics of modern work processes, that is, of the fabrication and 
production of use objects. Division of labor rather than increased 
mechanization has replaced the rigorous specialization formerly 
required for all workmanship. Workmanship is required only for 
the design and fabrication of models before they go into mass pro- 
duction, which also depends on tools and machinery. But mass 
production would, in addition, be altogether impossible without 
the replacement of workmen and specialization with laborers and 
the division of labor. 

Tools and instruments ease pain and effort and thereby change 
the modes in which the urgent necessity inherent in labor once was 
manifest to all. They do not change the necessity itself; they only 
serve to hide it from our senses. Something similar is true of labor’s 
products, which do not become more durable through abundance. 
The case is altogether different in the corresponding modern trans- 
formation of the work process by the introduction of the principle 
of division of labor. Here the very nature of work is changed and 
the production process, although it by no means produces objects 
for consumption, assumes the character of labor. Although ma- 
chines have forced us into an infinitely quicker rhythm of repeti- 
tion than the cycle of natural processes prescribed — and this spe- 
cifically modern acceleration is only too apt to make us disregard 
the repetitive character of all laboring — the repetition and the end- 
lessness of the process itself put the unmistakable mark of laboring 
upon it. This is even more evident in the use objects produced by 
these techniques of laboring. Their very abundance transforms 
them into consumer goods. The endlessness of the laboring process 
is guaranteed by the ever-recurrent needs of consumption; the end- 
lessness of production can be assured only if its products lose their 
use character and become more and more objects of consumption, 
or if, to put it in another way, the rate of use is so tremendously 
accelerated that the objective difference between use and consump- 
tion, between the relative durability of use objects and the swift 
coming and going of consumer goods, dwindles to insignificance. 

In our need for more and more rapid replacement of the worldly 

[ 125 ] 


things around us, we can no longer afford to use them, to respect 
and preserve their inherent durability; we must consume, devour, 
as it were, our houses and furniture and cars as though they were 
the “good things” of nature which spoil uselessly if they are not 
drawn swiftly into the never-ending cycle of man’s metabolism 
with nature. It is as though we had forced open the distinguishing 
boundaries which protected the world, the human artifice, from 
nature, the biological process which goes on in its very midst as 
well as the natural cyclical processes which surround it, deliver- 
ing and abandoning to them the always threatened stability of a 
human world. 

The ideals of homo faber , the fabricator of the world, which are 
permanence, stability, and durability, have been sacrificed to abun- 
dance, the ideal of the animal laborans. We live in a laborers’ society 
because only laboring, with its inherent fertility, is likely to bring 
about abundance; and we have changed work into laboring, broken 
it up into its minute particles until it has lent itself to division 
where the common denominator of the simplest performance is 
reached in order to eliminate from the path of human labor power 
— which is part of nature and perhaps even the most powerful of 
all natural forces— the obstacle of the “unnatural” and purely 
worldly stability of the human artifice. 


[[[A Consumers Society]]]

It is frequently said that we live in a consumers’ society, and since, 
as we saw, labor and consumption are but two stages of the same 
process, imposed upon man by the necessity of life, this is only 
another way of saying that we live in a society of laborers. This 
society did not come about through the emancipation of the labor- 
ing classes but by the emancipation of the laboring activity itself, 
which preceded by centuries the political emancipation of laborers. 
The point is not that for the first time in history laborers were ad- 
mitted and given equal rights in the public realm, but that we have 
almost succeeded in leveling all human activities to the common 
denominator of securing the necessities of life and providing for 
their abundance. Whatever we do, we are supposed to do for the 

[ 126 ] 

sake of “making a living” ; such is the verdict of society, and the 
number of people, especially in the professions who might chal- 
lenge it, has decreased rapidly. The only exception society is 
willing to grant is the artist, who, strictly speaking, is the only 
“worker” left in a laboring society. The same trend to level down 
all serious activities to the status of making a living is manifest in 
present-day labor theories, which almost unanimously define labor 
as the opposite of play. As a result, all serious activities, irrespec- 
tive of their fruits, are called labor, and every activity which is not 
necessary either for the life of the individual or for the life process 
of society is subsumed under playfulness . In these theories, 

[ 127 ] 

which by echoing the current estimate of a laboring society on the 
theoretical level sharpen it and drive it into its inherent extreme, 
not even the “work” of the artist is left; it is dissolved into play 
and has lost its worldly meaning. The playfulness of the artist is 
felt to fulfil the same function in the laboring life process of society 
as the playing of tennis or the pursuit of a hobby fulfils in the life of 
the individual. The emancipation of labor has not resulted in an 
equality of this activity with the other activities of the vita activa , 
but in its almost undisputed predominance. From the standpoint of 
“making a living,” every activity unconnected with labor becomes 
a “hobby.”

In order to dispel the plausibility of this self-interpretation of 
modern man, it may be well to remember that all civilizations prior 
to our own would rather have agreed with Plato that the “art of 
earning money” (techne misthametike) is entirely unconnected with 
the actual content even of such arts as medicine, navigation, or 
architecture, which were attended by monetary rewards. It was 
in order to explain this monetary reward, which obviously is of an 
altogether different nature from health, the object of medicine, or 
the erection of buildings, the object of architecture, that Plato in- 

troduced one more art to accompany them all. This additional art 
is by no means understood as the element of labor in the otherwise 
free arts, but, on the contrary, the one art through which the 
“artist,” the professional worker, as we would say, keeps himself 
free from the necessity to labor. This art is in the same category

[ 128 ] 

with the art required of the master of a household who must know 
how to exert authority and use violence in his rule over slaves. Its 
aim is to remain free from having “to make a living,” and the aims 
of the other arts are even farther removed from this elementary 
necessity. 

The emancipation of labor and the concomitant emancipation of 
the laboring classes from oppression and exploitation certainly 
meant progress in the direction of non-violence. It is much less cer- 
tain that it was also progress in the direction of freedom. No man- 
exerted violence, except the violence used in torture, can match 
the natural force with which necessity itself compels. It is for this 
reason that the Greeks derived their word for torture from neces- 
sity, calling it anagkai, and not from bia, used for violence as ex- 
erted by man over man, just as this is the reason for the historical 
fact that throughout occidental antiquity torture, the “necessity no 
man can withstand,” could be applied only to slaves, who were 
subject to necessity anyhow. It was the arts of violence, the arts 
of war, piracy, and ultimately absolute rule, which brought the 
defeated into the services of the victors and thereby held necessity 
in abeyance for the longer period of recorded history. The mod- 
em age, much more markedly than Christianity, has brought about 
—together with its glorification of labor — a tremendous degrada- 
tion in the estimation of these arts and a less great but not less im- 
portant actual decrease in the use of the instruments of violence in 

[ 129 ] 

human affairs generally. The elevation of labor and the necessity 
inherent in the laboring metabolism with nature appear to be inti- 
mately connected with the downgrading of all activities which 
either spring directly from violence, as the use of force in human 
relations, or harbor an element of violence within themselves, 
which, as we shall see, is the case for all workmanship. It is as 
though the growing elimination of violence throughout the modern 
age almost automatically opened the doors for the re-entry of ne- 
cessity on its most elementary level. What already happened once 
in our history, in the centuries of the declining Roman Empire, may 
be happening again. Even then, labor became an occupation of the 
free classes, “only to bring to them the obligations of the servile 
classes.”

The danger that the modern age’s emancipation of labor will not 
only fail to usher in an age of freedom for all but will result, on the 
contrary, in forcing all mankind for the first time under the yoke of 
necessity, was already clearly perceived by Marx when he in- 
sisted that the aim of a revolution could not possibly be the al- 
ready-accomplished emancipation of the laboring classes, but must 
consist in the emancipation of man from labor. At first glance, this 
aim seems utopian, and the only strictly utopian element in Marx’s 

[ 130 ] 

teachings. Emancipation from labor, in Marx’s own terms, is 
emancipation from necessity, and this would ultimately mean 
emancipation from consumption as well, that is, from the metabo- 
lism with nature which is the very condition of human life. Yet 
the developments of the last decade, and especially the possibilities 
opened up through the further development of automation, give us 
reason to wonder whether the utopia of yesterday will not turn 
into the reality of tomorrow, so that eventually only the effort of 
consumption will be left of “the toil and trouble” inherent in the 
biological cycle to whose motor human life is bound. 

However, not even this utopia could change the essential 
worldly futility of the life process. The two stages through which 
the ever-recurrent cycle of biological life must pass, the stages of 
labor and consumption, may change their proportion even to the 
point where nearly all human “labor power” is spent in consuming, 
with the concomitant serious social problem of leisure, that is, 
essentially the problem of how to provide enough opportunity for 
daily exhaustion to keep the capacity for consumption intact. 

[ 131 ] 

Painless and effortless consumption would not change but would 
only increase the devouring character of biological life until a man- 
kind altogether “liberated” from the shackles of pain and effort 
would be free to “consume” the whole world and to reproduce 
daily all things it wished to consume. How many things would 
appear and disappear daily and hourly in the life process of such a 
society would at best be immaterial for the world, if the world and 
its thing-character could withstand the reckless dynamism of a 
wholly motorized life process at all. The danger of future automa- 
tion is less the much deplored mechanization and artificialization of 
natural life than that, its artificiality notwithstanding, all human 
productivity would be sucked into an enormously intensified life 
process and would follow automatically, without pain or effort, its 
ever-recurrent natural cycle. The rhythm of machines would mag- 
nify and intensify the natural rhythm of life enormously, but it 
would not change, only make more deadly, life’s chief character 
with respect to the world, which is to wear down durability. 

It is a long way from the gradual decrease of working hours, 
which has progressed steadily for nearly a century, to this utopia. 
The progress, moreover, has been rather overrated, because it was 
measured against the quite exceptionally inhuman conditions of 
exploitation prevailing during the early stages of capitalism. If we 
think in somewhat longer periods, the total yearly amount of indi- 
vidual free time enjoyed at present appears less an achievement of 
modernity than a belated approximation to normality. In this as 

[ 132 ] 

in other respects, the specter of a true consumers’ society is more 
alarming as an ideal of present-day society than as an alr eady exist- 
ing reality. The ideal is not new; it was clearly indicated in the 
unquestioned assumption of classical political economy that the 
ultimate goal of the vita activa is growing wealth, abundance, and 
the “happiness of the greatest number.” And what else, finally, is 
this ideal of modern society but the age-old dream of the poor and 
destitute, which can have a charm of its own so long as it is a 
dream, but turns into a fool’s paradise as soon as it is realized. 

The hope that inspired Marx and the best men of the various 
workers’ movements— that free time eventually will emancipate 
men from necessity and make the animal laborans productive — 
rests on the illusion of a mechanistic philosophy which assumes that 
labor power, like any other energy, can never be lost, so that if it is 
not spent and exhausted in the drudgery of life it will automatically 
nourish other, “higher,” activities. The guiding model of this hope 
in Marx was doubtless the Athens of Pericles which, in the future, 
with the help of the vastly increased productivity of human labor, 
would need no slaves to sustain itself but would become a reality 
for all. A hundred years after Marx we know the fallacy of this 
reasoning; the spare time of the animal laborans is never spent in 
anything but consumption, and the more time left to him, the 
greedier and more craving his appetites. That these appetites be- 
come more sophisticated, so that consumption is no longer re- 
stricted to the necessities but, on the contrary, mainly concen- 
trates on the superfluities of life, does not change the character of 
this society, but harbors the grave danger that eventually no object 
of the world will be safe from consumption and annihilation 
through consumption. 

The rather uncomfortable truth of the matter is that the triumph 

[ 133 ] 

the modern world has achieved over necessity is due to the emanci- 
pation of labor, that is, to the fact that the animal laborans was per- 
mitted to occupy the public realm; and yet, as long as the animal 
laborans remains in possession of it, there can be no true public 
realm, but only private activities displayed in the open. The out- 
come is what is euphemistically called mass culture, and its deep- 
rooted trouble is a universal unhappiness, due on one side to the 
troubled balance between laboring and consumption and, on the 
other, to the persistent demands of the animal laborans to obtain a 
happiness which can be achieved only where life’s processes of 
exhaustion and regeneration, of pain and release from pain, strike a 
perfect balance. The universal demand for happiness and the wide- 
spread unhappiness in our society (and these are but two sides of 
the same coin) are among the most persuasive signs that we have 
begun to live in a labor society which lacks enough laboring to 
keep it contented. For only the animal laborans, and neither the 
craftsman nor the man of action, has ever demanded to be “happy” 
or thought that mortal men could be happy. 

One of the obvious danger signs that we may be on our way to 
bring into existence the ideal of the animal laborans is the extent to 
which our whole economy has become a waste economy, in which 
things must be almost as quickly devoured and discarded as they 
have appeared in the world, if the process itself is not to come to a 
sudden catastrophic end. But if the ideal were already in existence 
and we were truly nothing but members of a consumers’ society, 
we would no longer live in a world at all but simply be driven by 
a process in whose ever-recurring cycles things appear and dis- 
appear, manifest themselves and vanish, never to last long enough 
to surround the life process in their midst. 

The world, the man-made home erected on earth and made of 
the material which earthly nature delivers into human hands, con- 
sists not of things that are consumed but of things that are used. 
If nature and the earth generally constitute the condition of human 
life , then the world and the things of the world constitute the condi- 
tion under which this specifically human life can be at home on 
earth. Nature seen through the eyes of the animal laborans is the 
great provider of all “good things,” which belong equally to all her 
children, who “take [them] out of [her] hands” and “mix with” 

[ 134 ] 

them in labor and consumption. The same nature seen through 
the eyes of homo faber, the builder of the world, “furnishes only the 
almost worthless materials as in themselves,” whose whole value 
lies in the work performed upon them. Without taking things out 
of nature’s hands and consuming them, and without defending him- 
self against the natural processes of growth and decay, the animal 
laborans could never survive. But without being at home in the 
midst of things whose durability makes them fit for use and for 
erecting a world whose very permanence stands in direct contrast 
to life, this life would never be human. 

The easier that life has become in a consumers’ or laborers’ so- 
ciety, the more difficult it will be to remain aware of the urges of 
necessity by which it is driven, even when pain and effort, the 
outward manifestations of necessity, are hardly noticeable at all. 
The danger is that such a society, dazzled by the abundance of its 
growing fertility and caught in the smooth functioning of a never- 
ending process, would no longer be able to recognize its own futil- 
ity— the futility of a life which “does not fix or realize itself in any 
permanent subject which endures after [its] labour is past.” 

[ 135 ] 


[[CHAPTER IV: Work]]


[[[THE DURABILITY OF THE WORLD]]]

The work of our hands, as distinguished from the labor of our 
bodies — homofaber who makes and literally “works upon” as dis- 
tinguished from the animal laborans which labors and “mixes with” 
— fabricates the sheer unending variety of things whose sum total 
constitutes the human artifice. They are mostly, but not exclu- 
sively, objects for use and they possess the durability Locke 
needed for the establishment of property, the “value” Adam Smith 
needed for the exchange market, and they bear testimony to pro- 
ductivity, which Marx believed to be the test of human nature. 
Their proper use does not cause them to disappear and they give 
the human artifice the stability and solidity without which it could 
not be relied upon to house the unstable and mortal creature which 
is man. 

The durability of the human artifice is not absolute; the use we 
make of it, even though we do not consume it, uses it up. The life 
process which permeates our whole being invades it, too, and if we 
do not use the things of the world, they also will eventually decay, 
return into the over-all natural process from which they were 

[ 136 ] 

drawn and against which they were erected. If left to itself or dis- 
carded from the human world, the chair will again become wood, 
and the wood will decay and return to the soil from which the tree 
sprang before it was cut off to become the material upon which to 
work and with which to build. But though this may be the unavoid- 
able end of all single things in the world, the sign of their being 
products of a mortal maker, it is not so certainly the eventual fate 
of the human artifice itself, where all single things can be con- 
stantly replaced with the change of generations which come and 
inhabit the man-made world and go away. Moreover, while usage 
is bound to use up these objects, this end is not their destiny in the 
same way as destruction is the inherent end of all things for con- 
sumption. What usage wears out is durability. 

It is this durability which gives the things of the world their 
relative independence from men who produced and use them, their 
“objectivity” which makes them withstand, “stand against” and 
endure, at least for a time, the voracious needs and wants of their 
living makers and users. From this viewpoint, the things of the 
world have the function of stabilizing human life, and their objec- 
tivity lies in the fact that — in contradiction to the Heraclitean 
saying that the same man can never enter the same stream— men, 
their ever-changing nature notwithstanding, can retrieve their 
sameness, that is, their identity, by being related to the same chair 
and the same table. In other words, against the subjectivity of men 
stands the objectivity of the man-made world rather than the sub- 
lime indifference of an untouched nature, whose overwhelming 
elementary force, on the contrary, will compel them to swing re- 
lentlessly in the circle of their own biological movement, which 
fits so closely into the over-all cyclical movement of nature’s 
household. Only we who have erected the objectivity of a world of 
our own from what nature gives us, who have built it into the 
environment of nature so that we are protected from her, can look 
upon nature as something “objective.” Without a world between 
men and nature, there is eternal movement, but no objectivity. 

Although use and consumption, like work and labor, are not the 

[ 137 ] 

same, they seem to overlap in certain important areas to such an 
extent that the unanimous agreement with which both public and 
learned opinion have identified these two different matters seems 
well justified. Use, indeed, does contain an element of consump- 
tion, in so far as the wearing-out process comes about through the 
contact of the use object with the living consuming organism, and 
the closer the contact between the body and the used thing, the 
more plausible will an equation of the two appear. If one construes, 
for instance, the nature of use objects in terms of wearing apparel, 
he will be tempted to conclude that use is nothing but consumption 
at a slower pace. Against this stands what we mentioned before, 
that destruction, though unavoidable, is incidental to use but in- 
herent in consumption. What distinguishes the most flimsy pair of 
shoes from mere consumer goods is that they do not spoil if I do 
not wear them, that they have an independence of their own, how- 
ever modest, which enables them to survive even for a considerable 
time the changing moods of their owner. Used or unused, they will 
remain in the world for a certain while unless they are wantonly 
destroyed. 

A similar, much more famous and much more plausible, argu- 
ment can be raised in favor of an identification of work and labor. 
The most necessary and elementary labor of man, the tilling of the 
soil, seems to be a perfect example of labor transforming itself into 
work in the process, as it were. This seems so because tilling the 
soil, its close relation to the biological cycle and its utter depend- 
ence upon the larger cycle of nature notwithstanding, leaves some 
product behind which outlasts its own activity and forms a durable 
addition to the human artifice: the same task, performed year in 
and year out, will eventually transform the wilderness into culti- 
vated land. The example figures prominently in all ancient and 
modern theories of laboring precisely for this reason. Yet, despite 
an undeniable similarity and although doubtless the time-honored 
dignity of agriculture arises from the fact that tilling the soil not 
only procures means of subsistence but in this process prepares the 
earth for the building of the world, even in this case the distinction 
remains quite clear: the cultivated land is not, properly speaking, a 
use object, which is there in its own durability and requires for its 
permanence no more than ordinary care in preservation; the tilled 

[ 138 ] 

soil, if it is to remain cultivated, needs to be labored upon time and 
again. A true reification, in other words, in which the produced 
thing in its existence is secured once and for all, has never come to 
pass; it needs to be reproduced again and again in order to remain 
within the human world at all. 


[[[REIFICATION]]]

Fabrication, the work of homo faber, consists in reification. Solid- 
ity, inherent in all, even the most fragile, things, comes from the 
material worked upon, but this material itself is not simply given 
and there, like the fruits of field and trees which we may gather or 
leave alone without changing the household of nature. Material is 
already a product of human hands which have removed it from its 
natural location, either killing a life process, as in the case of the 
tree which must be destroyed in order to provide wood, or inter- 
rupting one of nature’s slower processes, as in the case of iron, 
stone, or marble torn out of the womb of the earth. This element 
of violation and violence is present in all fabrication, and homo 
faber, the creator of the human artifice, has always been a de- 
stroyer of nature. The animal laborans, which with its body and the 
help of tame animals nourishes life, may be the lord and master of 
all living creatures, but he still remains the servant of nature and 
the earth; only homo faber conducts himself as lord and master of 
the whole earth. Since his productivity was seen in the image of a 
Creator-God, so that where God creates ex nihilo, man creates out 
of given substance, human productivity was by definition bound to 
result in a Promethean revolt because it could erect a man-made 
world only after destroying part of God-created nature.

[ 139 ] 

The experience of this violence is the most elemental experience 
of human strength and, therefore, the very opposite of the painful, 
exhausting effort experienced in sheer labor. It can provide self- 
assurance and satisfaction, and can even become a source of self- 
confidence throughout life, all of which are quite different from the 
bliss which can attend a life spent in labor and toil or from the 
fleeting, though intense pleasure of laboring itself which comes 
about if the effort is co-ordinated and rhythmically ordered, and 
which essentially is the same as the pleasure felt in other rhyth- 
mic body movements. Most descriptions of the “joys of labor,” in 
so far as they are not late reflections of the biblical contented bliss 
of life and death and do not simply mistake the pride in having done 
a job with the “joy” of accomplishing it, are related to the elation 
felt by the violent exertion of a strength with which man measures 
himself against the overwhelming forces of the elements and which 
through the cunning invention of tools he knows how to multiply 
far beyond its natural measure. Solidity is not the result of 
pleasure or exhaustion in earning one’s bread “in the sweat of his 
brow,” but of this strength, and it is not simply borrowed or 
plucked as a free gift from nature’s own eternal presence, although 
it would be impossible without the material torn out of nature; it 
is already a product of man’s hands. 

The actual work of fabrication is performed under the guidance 
of a model in accordance with which the object is constructed. 
This model can be an image beheld by the eye of the mind or a 
blueprint in which the image has already found a tentative ma- 
terialization through work. In either case, what guides the work of 
fabrication is outside the fabricator and precedes the actual work 

[ 140 ] 

process in much the same way as the urgencies of the life process 
within the laborer precede the actual labor process. (This descrip- 
tion is in flagrant contradiction to the findings of modern psychol- 
ogy, which tell us almost unanimously that the images of the mind 
are as safely located in our heads as the pangs of hunger are located 
in our stomachs. This subjectivization of modern science, which is 
only a reflection of an even more radical subjectivization of the 
modem world, has its justification in this case in the fact that, in- 
deed, most work in the modern world is performed in the mode of 
labor, so that the worker, even if he wanted to, could not “labor 
for his work rather than for himself,” and frequently is instru- 
mental in the production of objects of whose ultimate shape he has 
not the slightest notion. These circumstances, though of great his- 
torical importance, are irrelevant in a description of the funda- 
mental articulations of the vita activa.) What claims our attention 
is the veritable gulf that separates all bodily sensations, pleasure or 
pain, desires and satisfactions — which are so “private” that they 
cannot even be adequately voiced, much less represented in the 
outside world, and therefore are altogether incapable of being 
reified from mental images which lend themselves so easily and 
naturally to reification that we neither conceive of making a bed 
without first having some image, some “idea” of a bed before our 
inner eye, nor can imagine a bed without having recourse to some 
visual experience of a real thing. 

It is of great importance to the role fabrication came to play 
within the hierarchy of the vita activa that the image or model 
whose shape guides the fabrication process not only precedes it, 
but does not disappear with the finished product, which it survives 
intact, present, as it were, to lend itself to an infinite continuation 
of fabrication. This potential multiplication, inherent in work, is 

[ 141 ] 

different in principle from the repetition which is the mark of 
labor. This repetition is urged upon and remains subject to the 
biological cycle; the needs and wants of the human body come and 
go, and though they reappear again and again at regular intervals, 
they never remain for any length of time. Multiplication, in dis- 
tinction from mere repetition, multiplies something that already 
possesses a relatively stable, relatively permanent existence in the 
world. This quality of permanence in the model or image, of being 
there before fabrication starts and remaining after it has come to 
an end, surviving all the possible use objects it continues to help 
into existence, had a powerful influence on Plato’s doctrine of 
eternal ideas. In so far as his teaching was inspired by the word 
idea or etdos (“shape” or “form”), which he used for the first time 
in a philosophical context, it rested on experiences in poiesis or 
fabrication, and although Plato used his theory to express quite 
different and perhaps much more “philosophical” experiences, he 
never failed to draw his examples from the field of making when he 
wanted to demonstrate the plausibility of what he was saying.

[ 142 ] 

I lie one eternal idea presiding over a multitude of perishable 
things derives its plausibility in Plato’s teachings from the per- 
manence and oneness of the model according to which many and 
perishable objects can be made. 

The process of making is itself entirely determined by the cate- 
gories of means and end. The fabricated thing is an end product in 
the twofold sense that the production process comes to an end in it 
(“the process disappears in the product,” as Marx said) and that it 
is only a means to produce this end. Labor, to be sure, also pro- 
duces for the end of consumption, but since this end, the thing to be 
consumed, lacks the worldly permanence of a piece of work, the 
end of the process is not determined by the end product but rather 
by the exhaustion of labor power, while the products themselves, 
on the other hand, immediately become means again, means of 
subsistence and reproduction of labor power. In the process of 
making, on the contrary, the end is beyond doubt: it has come 
when an entirely new thing with enough durability to remain in the 
world as an independent entity has been added to the human arti- 
fice. As far as the thing, the end product of fabrication, is con- 
cerned, the process need not be repeated. The impulse toward repe- 
at 1011 comes from the craftsman’s need to earn his means of sub- 
sistence, in which case his working coincides with his laboring; or 
it comes from a demand for multiplication in the market, in which 
case the craftsman who wishes to meet this demand has added, as 
Plato would have said, the art of earning money to his craft. The 
point here is that in either case the process is repeated for reasons 
outside itself and is unlike the compulsory repetition inherent in 
laboring, where one must eat in order to labor and must labor in 
order to eat. 

To have a definite beginning and a definite, predictable end is the 
mark of fabrication, which through this characteristic alone dis- 


[ 143 ] 

tinguishes itself from all other human activities. Labor, caught in 
the cyclical movement of the body’s life process, has neither a be- 
ginning nor an end. Action, though it may have a definite begin- 
ning, never, as we shall see, has a predictable end. This great re- 
liability of work is reflected in that the fabrication process, unlike 
action, is not irreversible: every thing produced by human hands 
can be destroyed by them, and no use object is so urgently needed 
in the life process that its maker cannot survive and afford its 
destruction. Homo faber is indeed a lord and master, not only be- 
cause he is the master or has set himself up as the master of all 
nature but because he is master of himself and his doings. This is 
true neither of the animal laborans , which is subject to the necessity 
of its own life, nor of the man of action, who remains in depend- 
ence upon his fellow men. Alone with his image of the future prod- 
uct, homo faber is free to produce, and again facing alone the work 
of his hands, he is free to destroy. 

[[[Instrumentality and Animal Laborans]]]

From the standpoint of homo faber, who relies entirely on the pri- 
mordial tools of his hands, man is, as Benjamin Franklin said, a 
“tool-maker.” The same instruments, which only lighten the bur- 
den and mechanize the labor of the animal laborans, are designed 
and invented by homo faber for the erection of a world of things, 
and their fitness and precision are dictated by such “objective” 
aims as he may wish to invent rather than by subjective needs and 
wants. Tools and instruments are so intensely worldly objects that 
we can classify whole civilizations using them as criteria. No- 
where, however, is their worldly character more manifest than 
when they are used in labor processes, where they are indeed the 
only tangible things that survive both the labor and the consump- 
tion process itself. For the animal laborans , therefore, as it is subject 
to and constantly occupied with the devouring processes of life, the 
durability and stability of the world are primarily represented in 
the tools and instruments it uses, and in a society of laborers, tools 

[ 144 ] 

are very likely to assume a more than mere instrumental character 
or function. 

The frequent complaints we hear about the perversion of ends 
and means in modern society, about men becoming the servants of 
the machines they themselves invented and of being “adapted” to 
their requirements instead of using them as instruments for human 
needs and wants, have their roots in the factual situation of labor- 
ing. In this situation, where production consists primarily in prepa- 
ration for consumption, the very distinction between means and 
ends, so highly characteristic of the activities of homofaber, simply 
does not make sense, and the instruments which homo faber in- 
vented and with which he came to the help of the labor of the 
animal laborans therefore lose their instrumental character once 
they are used by it. Within the life process itself, of which laboring 
remains an integral part and which it never transcends, it is idle to 
ask questions that presuppose the category of means and end, such 
as whether men live and consume in order to have strength to labor 
or whether they labor in order to have the means of consumption. 

If we consider this loss of the faculty to distinguish clearly be- 
tween means and ends in terms of human behavior, we can say that 
the free disposition and use of tools for a specific end product is 
replaced by rhythmic unification of the laboring body with its im- 
plement, the movement of laboring itself acting as the unifying 
force. Labor but not work requires for best results a rhythmically 
ordered performance and, in so far as many laborers gang together, 
needs a rhythmic co-ordination of all individual movements. In 

[ 145 ] 

this motion, the tools lose their instrumental character, and the 
clear distinction between man and his implements, as well as his 
ends, becomes blurred. What dominates the labor process and all 
work processes which are performed in the mode of laboring is 
neither man’s purposeful effort nor the product he may desire, but 
the motion of the process itself and the rhythm it imposes upon the 
laborers. Labor implements are drawn into this rhythm until body 
and tool swing in the same repetitive movement, that is, until, in 
the use of machines, which of all implements are best suited to the 
performance of the animal laborans, it is no longer the body’s move- 
ment that determines the implement’s movement but the machine’s 
movement which enforces the movements of the body. The point is 
that nothing can be mechanized more easily and less artificially 
than the rhythm of the labor process, which in its turn corresponds 
to the equally automatic repetitive rhythm of the life process and 
its metabolism with nature. Precisely because the animal laborans 

[ 146 ] 

does not use tools and instruments in order to build a world but in 
order to ease the labors of its own life process, it has lived literally 
in a world of machines ever since the industrial revolution and the 
emancipation of labor replaced almost all hand tools with machines 
which in one way or another supplanted human labor power with 
the superior power of natural forces. 

The decisive difference between tools and machines is perhaps 
best illustrated by the apparently endless discussion of whether 
man should be “adjusted” to the machine or the machines should be 
adjusted to the “nature” of man. We mentioned in the first chapter 
the chief reason why such a discussion must be sterile: if the hu- 
man condition consists in man’s being a conditioned being for 
whom everything, given or man-made, immediately becomes a 
condition of his further existence, then man “adjusted” himself to 
an environment of machines the moment he designed them. They 
certainly have become as inalienable a condition of our existence as 
tools and implements were in all previous ages . The interest of the 
discussion, from our point of view, therefore, lies rather in the fact 
that this question of adjustment could arise at all. There never was 
any doubt about man’s being adjusted or needing special adjust- 
ment to the tools he used; one might as well have adjusted him to 
his hands. The case of the machines is entirely different. Unlike 
the tools of workmanship, which at every given moment in the 
work process remain the servants of the hand, the machines de- 
mand that the laborer serve them, that he adjust me natural rhythm 
of his body to their mechanical movement. This, certainly, does 
not imply that men as such adjust to or become the servants of 
their machines; but it does mean that, as long as the work at the 
machines lasts, the mechanical process has replaced the rhythm of 
the human body. Even the most refined tool remains a servant, 
unable to guide or to replace the hand. Even the most primitive 
machine guides the body’s labor and eventually replaces it alto- 
gether. 

As is so frequently the case with historical developments, it 
seems as though the actual implications of technology, that is, of 
the replacement of tools and implements with machinery, have 
come to light only in its last stage, with the advent of automation. 
For our purposes it may be useful to recall, however briefly, the 

[ 147 ]

main stages of modem technology’s development since the begin- 
ning of the modern age. The first stage, the invention of the steam 
engine, which led into the industrial revolution, was still charac- 
terized by an imitation of natural processes and the use of natural 
forces for human purposes, which did not differ in principle from 
the old use of water and wind power. Not the principle of the 
steam engine was new but rather the discovery and use of the coal 
mines to feed it. The machine tools of this early stage reflect this 
imitation of naturally known processes; they, too, imitate and put 
to more powerful use the natural activities of the human hand. 
But today we are told that “the greatest pitfall to avoid is the 
assumption that the design aim is reproduction of the hand move- 
ments of the operator or laborer.”

The next stage is chiefly characterized by the use of electricity, 
and, indeed, electricity still determines the present stage of techni- 
cal development. This stage can no longer be described in terms of 
a gigantic enlargement and continuation of the old arts and crafts, 
and it is only to this world that the categories of homo faber , to 
whom every instrument is a means to achieve a prescribed end, no 
longer apply. For here we no longer use material as nature yields it 
to us, killing natural processes or interrupting or imitating them. 
In all these instances, we changed and denaturalized nature for our 
own worldly ends, so that the human world or artifice on one hand 
and nature on the other remained two distinctly separate entities. 
Today we have begun to “create,” as it were, that is, to unchain 
natural processes of our own which would never have happened 
without us, and instead of carefully surrounding the human artifice 
with defenses against nature’s elementary forces, keeping them as 


[ 148 ] 

far as possible outside the man-made world, we have channeled 
these forces, along with their elementary power, into the world 
itself. The result has been a veritable revolution in the concept of 
fabrication; manufacturing, which always had been “a series of 
separate steps,” has become “a continuous process,” the process of 
the conveyor belt and the assembly line.

Automation is the most recent stage in this development, which 
indeed “illuminates the whole history of machinism .” It certainly 
will remain the culminating point of the modern development, even 
if the atomic age and a technology based upon nuclear discoveries 
puts a rather rapid end to it. The first instruments of nuclear tech- 
nology, the various types of atom bombs, which, if released in suf- 

[ 149 ] 

ficient and not even very great quantities, could destroy all organic 
life on earth, present sufficient evidence for the enormous scale on 
which such a change might take place. Here it would no longer be 
a question of unchaining and letting loose elementary natural proc- 
esses, but of handling on the earth and in everyday life energies and 
forces such as occur only outside the earth, in the universe; this is 
already done, but only in the research laboratories of nuclear 
physicists. If present technology consists of channeling natural 
forces into the world of the human artifice, future technology may 
yet consist of channeling the universal forces of the cosmos around 
us into the nature of the earth. It remains to be seen whether these 
future techniques will transform the household of nature as we 
have known it since the beginning of our world to the same extent 
or even more than the present technology has changed the very 
worldliness of the human artifice. 

The channeling of natural forces into the human world has shat- 
tered the very purposefulness of the world, the fact that objects are 
the ends for which tools and implements are designed. It is char- 
acteristic of all natural processes that they come into being without 
the help of man, and those things are natural which are not “made” 
but grow by themselves into whatever they become. (This is also 
the authentic meaning of our word “nature,” whether we derive it 
from its latin root nasci, to be born, or trace it back to its Greek 
origin, physis, which comes from phyein, to grow out of, to appear 
by itself.) Unlike the products of human hands, which must be 
realized step by step and for which the fabrication process is en- 
tirely distinct from the existence of the fabricated thing itself, the 
natural thing’s existence is not separate but is somehow identical 
with the process through which it comes into being: the seed con- 
tains and, in a certain sense, already is the tree, and the tree stops 
being if the process of growth through which it came into existence 


[ 150 ]

stops. If we see these processes against the background of human 
purposes, which have a willed beginning and a definite end, they 
assume the character of automatism. We call automatic all courses 
of movement which are self-moving and therefore outside the 
range of wilful and purposeful interference. In the mode of produc- 
tion ushered in by automation, the distinction between operation 
and product, as well as the product’s precedence over the operation 
(which is only the means to produce the end), no longer make 
sense and have become obsolete. The categories of homo faber 
and his world apply here no more than they ever could apply to 
nature and the natural universe. This is, incidentally, why modern 
advocates of automation usually take a very determined stand 
against the mechanistic view of nature and against the practical 
utilitarianism of the eighteenth century, which were so eminently 
characteristic of the one-sided, single-minded work orientation of 
homo faber. 

The discussion of the whole problem of technology, that is, of 
the transformation of life and world through the introduction of the 
machine, has been strangely led astray through an all-too-exclusive 
concentration upon the service or disservice the machines render 
to men. The assumption here is that every tool and implement is 
primarily designed to make human life easier and human labor less 
painful. Their instrumentality is understood exclusively in this 
anthropocentric sense. But the instrumentality of tools and imple- 
ments is much more closely related to the object it is designed to 
produce, and their sheer “human value” is restricted to the use the 
animal laborans makes of them. In other words, homo faber , the 
toolmaker, invented tools and implements in order to erect a 
world, not — at least, not primarily — to help the human life process. 
The question therefore is not so much whether we are the masters 
or the slaves of our machines, but whether machines still serve the 
world and its things, or if, on the contrary, they and the automatic 
motion of their processes have begun to rule and even destroy 
world and things. 

One thing is certain: the continuous automatic process of manu- 
facturing has not only done away with the “unwarranted assump- 
tion” that “human hands guided by human brains represent the 

[ 151 ] 

optimum efficiency,” but with the much more important assump- 
tion that the things of the world around us should depend upon 
human design and be built in accordance with human standards of 
either utility or beauty. In place of both utility and beauty, which 
are standards of the world, we have come to design products that 
still fulfil certain “basic functions” but whose shape will be pri- 
marily determined by the operation of the machine. The “basic 
functions” are of course the functions of the human animal’s life 
process, since no other function is basically necessary, but the 
product itself— not only its variations but even the “total change to 
a new product”— will depend entirely upon the capacity of the 
machine. 

To design objects for the operational capacity of the machine 
instead of designing machines for the production of certain ob- 
jects would indeed be the exact reversal of the means-end cate- 
gory, if this category still made any sense. But even the most gen- 
eral end, the release of manpower, that was usually assigned to 
machines, is now thought to be a secondary and obsolete aim, in- 
adequate to and limiting potential “startling increases in effi- 
ciency .” As matters stand today, it has become as senseless to 
describe this world of machines in terms of means and ends as it 
has always been senseless to ask nature if she produced the seed to 
produce a tree or the tree to produce the seed. By the same token 
it is quite probable that the continuous process pursuant to the 
channeling of nature’s never-ending processes into the human 
world, though it may very well destroy the world qua world as 
human artifice, will as reliably and limitlessly provide the species 
man-kind with the necessities of life as nature herself did before 
men erected their artificial home on earth and set up a barrier be- 
tween nature and themselves. 

For a society of laborers, the world of machines has become a 
substitute for the real world, even though this pseudo world can- 
not fulfil the most important task of the human artifice, which is to 
offer mortals a dwelling place more permanent and more stable 
than themselves. In the continuous process of operation, this world 
of machines is even losing that independent worldly character 
which the tools and implements and the early machinery of the 

[ 152 ] 

modern age so eminently possessed. The natural processes on 
which it feeds increasingly relate it to the biological process itself, 
so that the apparatuses we once handled freely begin to look as 
though they were “shells belonging to the human body as the shell 
belongs to the body of a turtle.” Seen from the vantage point of 
this development, technology in fact no longer appears “as the 
product of a conscious human effort to enlarge material power, but 
rather like a biological development of mankind in which the in- 
nate structures of the human organism are transplanted in an ever- 
increasing measure into the environment of man.”

[[[instrumentality and Homo Faber]]] 

The implements and tools of homo faber , from which the most fun- 
damental experience of instrumentality arises, determine all work 
and fabrication. Here it is indeed true that the end justifies the 
means; it does more, it produces and organizes them. The end jus- 
tifies the violence done to nature to win the material, as the wood 
justifies killing the tree and the table justifies destroying the wood. 
Because of the end product, tools are designed and implements in- 
vented, and the same end product organizes the work process it- 
self, decides about the needed specialists, the measure of co-opera- 
tion, the number of assistants, etc. During the work process, every- 
thing is judged in terms of suitability and usefulness for the desired 
end, and for nothing else. 

The same standards of means and end apply to the product itself. 
Though it is an end with respect to the means by which it was 
produced and is the end of the fabrication process, it never be- 
comes, so to speak, an end in itself, at least not as long as it re- 
mains an object for use. The chair which is the end of carpentering 
can show its usefulness only by again becoming a means, either as a 
thing whose durability permits its use as a means for comfortable 
living or as a means of exchange. The trouble with the utility 
standard inherent in the very activity of fabrication is that the rela- 
tionship between means and end on which it relies is very much 
like a chain whose every end can serve again as a means in some 

[ 153 ] 


other context. In other words, in a strictly utilitarian world, all 
ends are bound to be of short duration and to be transformed into 
means for some further ends.

This perplexity, inherent in all consistent utilitarianism, the 
philosophy of homo faber par excellence, can be diagnosed theo- 
retically as an innate incapacity to understand the distinction be- 
tween utility and meaningfulness, which we express linguistically 
by distinguishing between “in order to” and “for the sake of.” 
Thus the ideal of usefulness permeating a society of craftsmen — 
like the ideal of comfort in a society of laborers or the ideal of 
acquisition ruling commercial societies — is actually no longer a 
matter of utility but of meaning. It is “for the sake of” usefulness 
in general that homo faber judges and does everything in terms of 
“in order to.” The ideal of usefulness itself, like the ideals of other 
societies, can no longer be conceived as something needed in order 
to have something else; it simply defies questioning about its own 
use. Obviously there is no answer to the question which Lessing 
once put to the utilitarian philosophers of his time: “And what is 
the use of use?” The perplexity of utilitarianism is that it gets 
caught in the unending chain of means and ends without ever ar- 
riving at some principle which could justify the category of means 
and end, that is, of utility itself. The “in order to” has become the 
content of the “for the sake of”; in other words, utility established 
as meaning generates meaninglessness. 

Within the category of means and end, and among the experi- 
ences of instrumentality which rules over the whole world of use 
objects and utility, there is no way to end the chain of means and 
ends and prevent all ends from eventually being used again as 
means, except to declare that one thing or another is “an end in 
itself.” In the world of homo faber, where everything must be of 
some use, that is, must lend itself as an instrument to achieve 
something else, meaning itself can appear only as an end, as an 
“end in itself” which actually is either a tautology applying to all 
ends or a contradiction in terms. For an end, once it is attained, 
ceases to be an end and loses its capacity to guide and justify the 

[ 154 ] 

choice of means, to organize and produce them. It has now become 
an object among objects, that is, it has been added to the huge 
arsenal of the given from which homo faber selects freely his means 
to pursue his ends. Meaning, on the contrary, must be permanent 
and lose nothing of its character, whether it is achieved or, rather, 
found by man or fails man and is missed by him. Homo faber , in so 
far as he is nothing but a fabricator and thinks in no terms but 
those of means and ends which arise directly out of his work activ- 
ity, is just as incapable of understanding meaning as the animal 
laborans is incapable of understanding instrumentality. And just as 
the implements and tools homo faber uses to erect the world be- 
come for the animal laborans the world itself, thus the meaningful- 
ness of this world, which actually is beyond the reach of homo 
faber , becomes for him the paradoxical “end in itself.” 

The only way out of the dilemma of meaninglessness in all 
strictly utilitarian philosophy is to turn away from the objective 
world of use things and fall back upon the subjectivity of use itself. 
Only in a strictly anthropocentric world, where the user, that is, 
man himself, becomes the ultimate end which puts a stop to the 
unending chain of ends and means, can utility as such acquire the 
dignity of meaningfulness. Yet the tragedy is that in the moment 
homo faber seems to have found fulfilment in terms of his own ac- 
tivity, he begins to degrade the world of things, the end and end 
product of his own mind and hands; if man the user is the highest 
end, “the measure of all things,” then not only nature, treated by 
homo faber as the almost “worthless material” upon which to 
work, but the “valuable” things themselves have become mere 
means, losing thereby their own intrinsic “value.” 

The anthropocentric utilitarianism of homo faber has found its 
greatest expression in the Kantian formula that no man must ever 
become a means to an end, that every human being is an end in 
himself. Although we find earlier (for instance, in Locke’s in- 
sistence that no man can be permitted to possess another man’s 
body or use his bodily strength) an awareness of the fateful con- 
sequences which an unhampered and unguided thinking in terms of 
means and ends must invariably entail in the political realm, it is 
only in Kant that the philosophy of the earlier stages of the modern 
age frees itself entirely of the common sense platitudes which we 

[ 155 ] 


always find where homo faber rules the standards of society. The 
reason is, of course, that Kant did not mean to formulate or con- 
ceptualize the tenets of the utilitarianism of his time, but on the 
contrary wanted first of all to relegate the means-end category to 
its proper place and prevent its use in the field of political action. 
His formula, however, can no more deny its origin in utilitarian 
thinking than his other famous and also inherently paradoxical in- 
terpretation of man’s attitude toward the only objects that are not 
“for use,” namely works of art, in which he said we take “pleasure 
without any interest.” For the same operation which establishes 
man as the “supreme end” permits him “if he can [to] subject the 
whole of nature to it,” that is, to degrade nature and the world 
into mere means, robbing both of their independent dignity. Not 
even Kant could solve the perplexity or enlighten the blindness of 
homo faber with respect to the problem of meaning without turning 
to the paradoxical “end in itself,” and this perplexity lies in the 
fact that while only fabrication with its instrumentality is capable 
of building a world, this same world becomes as worthless as the 
employed material, a mere means for further ends, if the standards 
which governed its coming into being are permitted to rule it after 
its establishment. 

Man, in so far as he is homo faber, instrumentalizes, and his in- 
strumentalization implies a degradation of all things into means, 
their loss of intrinsic and independent value, so that eventually not 
only the objects of fabrication but also “the earth in general and 
all forces of nature,” which clearly came into being without the 
help of man and have an existence independent of the human world, 
lose their “value because [they] do not present the reification 
which comes from work .” It was for no other reason than this 
attitude of homo faber to the world that the Greeks in their classical 
period declared the whole field of the arts and crafts, where men 
work with instruments and do something not for its own sake but 

[ 156 ] 

in order to produce something else, to be banausic , a term perhaps 
best translated by “philistine,” implying vulgarity of thinking 
and acting in terms of expediency. The vehemence of this contempt 
will never cease to startle us if we realize that the great masters of 
Greek sculpture and architecture were by no means excepted from 
the verdict. 

The issue at stake is, of course, not instrumentality, the use of 
means to achieve an end, as such, but rather the generalization of 
the fabrication experience in which usefulness and utility are estab- 
lished as the ultimate standards for life and the world of men. This 
generalization is inherent in the activity of homo faber because the 
experience of means and end, as it is present in fabrication, does 
not disappear with the finished product but is extended to its 
ultimate destination, which is to serve as a use object. The instru- 
mentalization of the whole world and the earth, this limitless de- 
valuation of everything given, this process of growing meaning- 
lessness where every end is transformed into a means and which 
can be stopped only by making man himself the lord and master of 
all things, does not directly arise out of the fabrication process; for 
from the viewpoint of fabrication the finished product is as much 
an end in itself, an independent durable entity with an existence of 
its own, as man is an end in himself in Kant s political philosophy. 
Only in so far as fabrication chiefly fabricates use objects does the 
finished product again become a means, and only in so far as the 
life process takes hold of things and uses them for its purposes does 
the productive and limited instrumentality of fabrication change 
into the limitless instrumentalization of everything that exists. 

It is quite obvious that the Greeks dreaded this devaluation of 
world and nature with its inherent anthropocentrism— the “ab- 
surd” opinion that man is the highest being and that everything 
else is subject to the exigencies of human life (Aristotle) -no less 
than they despised the sheer vulgarity of all consistent utilitarian- 
ism. To what extent they were aware of the consequences of seeing 
in homo faber the highest human possibility is perhaps best illus- 
trated by Plato’s famous argument against Protagoras and his ap- 
parently self-evident statement that “man is the measure of all use 
things ( chremata ) , of the existence of those that are, and of the non- 

[ 157 ] 

existence of those that are not .” (Protagoras evidently did not 
say: “Man is the measure of all things,” as tradition and the stand- 
ard translations have made him say.) The point of the matter is 
that Plato saw immediately that if one makes man the measure of 
all things for use, it is man the user and instrumentalizer, and not 
man the speaker and doer or man the thinker, to whom the world 
is being related. And since it is in the nature of man the user and 
instrumentalizer to look upon everything as means to an end— 
upon every tree as potential wood— this must eventually mean 
that man becomes the measure not only of things whose existence 
depends upon him but of literally everything there is. 

In this Platonic interpretation, Protagoras in fact sounds like the 
earliest forerunner of Kant, for if man is the measure of all things, 
then man is the only thing outside the means-end relationship, the 
only end in himself who can use everything else as a means. Plato 
knew quite well that the possibilities of producing use objects and 
of treating all things of nature as potential use objects are as limit- 
less as the wants and talents of human beings. If one permits the 
standards of homo faber to rule the finished world as they must 
necessarily rule the coming into being of this world, then homo 
faber will eventually help himself to everything and consider every- 
thing that is as a mere means for himself. He will judge every thing 
as though it belonged to the class of chremata, of use objects, so 
that, to follow Plato’s own example, the wind will no longer be un- 
derstood in its own right as a natural force but will be considered 
exclusively in accordance with human needs for warmth or refresh- 
ment— which, of course, means that the wind as something objec- 
tively given has been eliminated from human experience. It is be- 
cause of these consequences that Plato, who at the end of his life 
recalls once more in the Laws the saying of Protagoras, replies 
with an almost paradoxical formula: not man — who because of his 


[ 158 ] 

wants and talents wishes to use everything and therefore ends by 
depriving all things of their intrinsic worth— but “the god is the 
measure [even] of mere use objects .”

[[[THE EXCHANGE MARKET]]]

Marx— in one of many asides which testify to his eminent histori- 
cal sense— once remarked that Benjamin Franklin’s definition of 
man as a toolmaker is as characteristic of “Yankeedom,” that is, of 
the modern age, as the definition of man as a political animal was 
for antiquity. The truth of this remark lies in the fact that the 
modern age was as intent on excluding political man, that is, man 
who acts and speaks, from its public realm as antiquity was on ex- 
cluding homofaber. In both instances the exclusion was not a matter 
of course, as was the exclusion of laborers and the propertyless 
classes until their emancipation in the nineteenth century. Ihe 
modern age was of course perfectly aware that the political realm 
was not always and need not necessarily be a mere function of 
“society,” destined to protect the productive, social side of human 
nature through governmental administration; but it regarded ev- 
erything beyond the enforcement of law and order as “idle talk” 
and “vain-glory.” The human capacity on which it based its claim 
of the natural innate productivity of society was the unquestion- 
able productivity of homo faber. Conversely, antiquity knew full 
well types of human communities in which not the citizen of the 
polis and not the res publica as such established and determined the 
content of the public realm, but where the public life of the or- 
dinary man was restricted to “working for the people” at large, 
that is, to being a demiourgos, a worker for the people as distin- 
guished from an oiketes , a household laborer and therefore a slave.

[ 159 ] 

The hallmark of these non-political communities was that their 
public place, the agora , was not a meeting place of citizens, but a 
market place where craftsmen could show and exchange their 
products. In Greece, moreover, it was the ever-frustrated ambi- 
tion of all tyrants to discourage the citizens from worrying about 
public affairs, from idling their time away in unproductive ago- 
reuein and politeuesthai , and to transform the agora into an assem- 
blage of shops like the bazaars of oriental despotism. What char- 
acterized these market places, and later characterized the medieval 
cities’ trade and craft districts, was that the display of goods for 
sale was accompanied by a display of their production. “Con- 
spicuous production” (if we may vary Veblen’s term) is, in fact, 
no less a trait of a society of producers than “conspicuous con- 
sumption” is a characteristic of a laborers’ society. 

Unlike the animal laborans, whose social life is worldless and 
herdlike and who therefore is incapable of building or inhabiting a 
public, worldly realm, homo faber is fully capable of having a pub- 
lic realm of his own, even though it may not be a political realm, 
properly speaking. His public realm is the exchange market, where 
he can show the products of his hand and receive the esteem which 
is due him. This inclination to showmanship is closely connected 
with and probably no less deeply rooted than the “propensity to 
truck, barter and exchange one thing for another,” which, accord- 
ing to Adam Smith, distinguishes man from animal. The point 
is that homo faber, the builder of the world and the producer of 
things, can find his proper relationship to other people only by ex- 
changing his products with theirs, because these products them- 


[ 160 ] 

selves are always produced in isolation. The privacy which the 
early modern age demanded as the supreme right of each member 
of society was actually the guaranty of isolation, without which no 
work can be produced. Not the onlookers and spectators on the 
medieval market places, where the craftsman in his isolation was 
exposed to the light of the public, but only the rise of the social 
realm, where the others are not content with beholding, judging, 
and admiring but wish to be admitted to the company of the crafts- 
man and to participate as equals in the work process, threatened 
the “splendid isolation” of the worker and eventually undermined 
the very notions of competence and excellence. This isolation from 
others is the necessary life condition for every mastership which 
consists in being alone with the “idea,” the mental image of the 
thing to be. This mastership, unlike political forms of domination, 
is primarily a mastery of things and material and not of people. 
The latter, in fact, is quite secondary to the activity of craftsman- 
ship, and the words “worker” and “master ”— ouvrier and maitre— 
were originally used synonymously.

The only company that grows out of workmanship directly is in 
the need of the master for assistants or in his wish to educate others 
in his craft. But the distinction between his skill and the unskilled 
help is temporary, like the distinction between adults and children. 
There can be hardly anything more alien or even more destructive 
to workmanship than teamwork, which actually is only a variety 
of the division of labor and presupposes the “breakdown of opera- 
tions into their simple constituent motions.” The team, the multi- 

[ 161 ]

headed subject of all production carried out according to the prin- 
ciple of division of labor, possesses the same togetherness as the 
parts which form the whole, and each attempt of isolation on the 
part of the members of the team would be fatal to the production 
itself. But it is not only this togetherness which the master and 
workman lacks while actively engaged in production; the spe- 
cifically political forms of being together with others, acting in 
concert and speaking with each other, are completely outside the 
range of his productivity. Only when he stops working and his 
product is finished can he abandon his isolation. 

Historically, the last public realm, the last meeting place which 
is at least connected with the activity of homo faber, is the ex- 
change market on which his products are displayed. The commer- 
cial society, characteristic of the earlier stages of the modern age 
or the beginnings of manufacturing capitalism, sprang from this 
“conspicuous production” with its concomitant hunger for uni- 
versal possibilities of truck and barter, and its end came with the 
rise of labor and the labor society which replaced conspicuous pro- 
duction and its pride with “conspicuous consumption” and its 
concomitant vanity. 

The people who met on the exchange market, to be sure, were 
no longer the fabricators themselves, and they did not meet as 
persons but as owners of commodities and exchange values, as 
Marx abundantly pointed out. In a society where exchange of 
products has become the chief public activity, even the laborers, 
because they are confronted with “money or commodity owners,” 
become proprietors, “owners of their labor power.” It is only at 
this point that Marx’s famous self-alienation, the degradation of 
men into commodities, sets in, and this degradation is characteristic 
of labor’s situation in a manufacturing society which judges men 
not as persons but as producers, according to the quality of their 
products. A laboring society, on the contrary, judges men accord- 
ing to the functions they perform in the labor process; while labor 
power in the eyes of homo faber is only the means to produce the 
necessarily higher end, that is, either a use object or an object for 
exchange, laboring society bestows upon labor power the same 
higher value it reserves for the machine. In other words, this so- 
ciety is only seemingly more “humane,” although it is true that 

[ 162 ] 

under its conditions the price of human labor rises to such an extent 
that it may seem to be more valued and more valuable than any 
given material or matter; in fact, it only foreshadows something 
even more “valuable,” namely, the smoother functioning of the 
machine whose tremendous power of processing first standardizes 
and then devaluates all things into consumer goods. 

Commercial society, or capitalism in its earlier stages when it 
was still possessed by a fiercely competitive and acquisitive spirit, 
is still ruled by the standards of homo faber. When homo faber 
comes out of his isolation, he appears as a merchant and trader and 
establishes the exchange market in this capacity. This market 
must exist prior to the rise of a manufacturing class, which then 
produces exclusively for the market, that is, produces exchange 
objects rather than use things. In this process from isolated crafts- 
manship to manufacturing for the exchange market, the finished 
end product changes its quality somewhat but not altogether. Dura- 
bility, which alone determines if a thing can exist as a thing and 
endure in the world as a distinct entity, remains the supreme cri- 
terion, although it no longer makes a thing fit for use but rather fit 
to “be stored up beforehand” for future exchange.

This is the change in quality reflected in the current distinction 
between use and exchange value, whereby the latter is related to 
the former as the merchant and trader is related to the fabricator 
and manufacturer. In so far as homo faber fabricates use objects, he 
not only produces them in the privacy of isolation but also for the 
privacy of usage, from which they emerge and appear in the public 
realm when they become commodities in the exchange market. It 
has frequently been remarked and unfortunately as frequently been 
forgotten that value, being “an idea of proportion between the pos- 
session of one thing and the possession of another in the conception 
of man,” “always means value in exchange .” For it is only in 
the exchange market, where everything can be exchanged for 
something else, that all things, whether they are products of labor 

[ 163 ] 

or work, consumer goods or use objects, necessary for the life of 
the body or the convenience of living or the life of the mind, be- 
come “values.” This value consists solely in the esteem of the 
public realm where the things appear as commodities, and it is 
neither labor, nor work, nor capital, nor profit, nor material, 
which bestows such value upon an object, but only and exclusively 
the public realm where it appears to be esteemed, demanded, or 
neglected. Value is the quality a thing can never possess in privacy 
but acquires automatically the moment it appears in public. This 
“marketable value,” as Locke very clearly pointed out, has noth- 
ing to do with “the intrinsick natural worth of anything ” which 
is an objective quality of the thing itself, “outside the will of the 
individual purchaser or seller; something attached to the thing it- 
self, existing whether he liked it or not, and that he ought to recog- 
nize .” This intrinsic worth of a thing can be changed only 
through the change of the thing itself— thus one ruins the worth of 
a table by depriving it of one of its legs — whereas “the marketable 
value” of a commodity is altered by “the alteration of some propor- 
tion which that commodity bears to something else.” 

Values, in other words, in distinction from things or deeds or 
ideas, are never the products of a specific human activity, but come 
into being whenever any such products are drawn into the ever- 
changing relativity of exchange between the members of society. 

[ 164 ] 

Nobody, as Marx rightly insisted, seen “in his isolation produces 
values,” and nobody, he could have added, in his isolation cares 
about them; things or ideas or moral ideals “become values only in 
their social relationship.” 

The confusion in classical economics, and the worse confusion 
arising from the use of the term “value” in philosophy, were 
originally caused by the fact that the older word “worth,” which 
we still find in Locke, was supplanted by the seemingly more sci- 
entific term, “use value.” Marx, too, accepted this terminology 
and, in line with his repugnance to the public realm, saw quite 
consistently in the change from use value to exchange value the 
original sin of capitalism. But against these sins of a commercial 
society, where indeed the exchange market is the most important 
public place and where therefore every thing becomes an exchange- 
able value, a commodity, Marx did not summon up the “intrinsick” 
objective worth of the thing in itself. In its stead he put the func- 
tion things have in the consuming life process of men which knows 
neither objective and intrinsic worth nor subjective and socially 
determined value. In the socialist equal distribution of all goods to 
all who labor, every tangible thing dissolves into a mere function 
in the regeneration process of life and labor power. 

However, this verbal confusion tells only one part of the story. 
The reason for Marx’s stubborn retention of the term “use value,” 
as well as for the numerous futile attempts to find some objective 
source — such as labor, or land, or profit — for the birth of values, 
was that nobody found it easy to accept the simple fact that no 
“absolute value” exists in the exchange market, which is the proper 
sphere for values, and that to look for it resembled nothing so 
much as the attempt to square the circle. The much deplored de- 
valuation of all things, that is, the loss of all intrinsic worth, begins 
with their transformation into values or commodities, for from this 
moment on they exist only in relation to some other thing which can 


[ 165 ] 


be acquired in their stead. Universal relativity, that a thing exists 
only in relation to other things, and loss of intrinsic worth, that 
nothing any longer possesses an “objective” value independent of 
the ever-changing estimations of supply and demand, are inherent 
in the very concept of value itself. The reason why this develop- 
ment, which seems inevitable in a commercial society, became a 
deep source of uneasiness and eventually constituted the chief 
problem of the new science of economics was not even relativity as 
such, but rather the fact that homo faber, whose whole activity is 
determined by the constant use of yardsticks, measurements, rules, 
and standards, could not bear the loss of “absolute” standards or 
yardsticks. For money, which obviously serves as the common 
denominator for the variety of things so that they can be exchanged 
for each other, by no means possesses the independent and objec- 
tive existence, transcending all uses and surviving all manipulation, 
that the yardstick or any other measurement possesses with regard 
to the things it is supposed to measure and to the men who handle 
them. 

It is this loss of standards and universal rules, without which no 
world could ever be erected by man, that Plato already perceived 
in the Protagorean proposal to establish man, the fabricator of 
things, and the use he makes of them, as their supreme measure. 
This shows how closely the relativity of the exchange market is 
connected with the instrumentality arising out of the world of the 
craftsman and the experience of fabrication. The former, indeed, 
develops without break and consistently from the latter. Plato’s 
reply, however — not man, a “god is the measure of all things” 


[ 166 ] 

— would be an empty, moralizing gesture if it were really true, 
as the modern age assumed, that instrumentality under the dis- 
guise of usefulness rules the realm of the finished world as ex- 
clusively as it rules the activity through which the world and all 
things it contains came into being. 

[[[THE PERMANENCE OF THE WORLD AND THE WORK OF ART]]]

Among the things that give the human artifice the stability without 
which it could never be a reliable home for men are a number of 
objects which are strictly without any utility whatsoever and 
which, moreover, because they are unique, are not exchangeable 
and therefore defy equalization through a common denominator 
such as money; if they enter the exchange market, they can only be 
arbitrarily priced. Moreover, the proper intercourse with a work 
of art is certainly not “using” it; on the contrary, it must be re- 
moved carefully from the whole context of ordinary use objects to 
attain its proper place in the world. By the same token, it must be 
removed from the exigencies and wants of daily life, with which it 
has less contact than any other thing. Whether this uselessness of 
art objects has always pertained or whether art formerly served 
the so-called religious needs of men as ordinary use objects serve 
more ordinary needs does not enter the argument. Even if the his- 
torical origin of art were of an exclusively religious or mythologi- 
cal character, the fact is that art has survived gloriously its sever- 
ance from religion, magic, and myth. 

Because of their outstanding permanence, works of art are the 
most intensely worldly of all tangible things; their durability is 
almost untouched by the corroding effect of natural processes, 
since they are not subject to the use of living creatures, a use 
which, indeed, far from actualizing their own inherent purpose— 
as the purpose of a chair is actualized when it is sat upon— can only 
destroy them. Thus, their durability is of a higher order than that 
which all things need in order to exist at all; it can attain perma- 
nence throughout the ages. In this permanence, the very stability 
of the human artifice, which, being inhabited and used by mortals, 

[ 167 ] 

can never be absolute, achieves a representation of its own. No- 
where else does the sheer durability of the world of things appear 
in such purity and clarity, nowhere else therefore does this thing- 
world reveal itself so spectacularly as the non-mortal home for 
mortal beings. It is as though worldly stability had become trans- 
parent in the permanence of art, so that a premonition of immortal- 
ity, not the immortality of the soul or of life but of something im- 
mortal achieved by mortal hands, has become tangibly present, to 
shine and to be seen, to sound and to be heard, to speak and to be 
read. 

The immediate source of the art work is the human capacity for 
thought, as man’s “propensity to truck and barter” is the source of 
exchange objects, and as his ability to use is the source of use 
things. These are capacities of man and not mere attributes of the 
human animal like feelings, wants, and needs, to which they are 
related and which often constitute their content. Such human prop- 
erties are as unrelated to the world which man creates as his home 
on earth as the corresponding properties of other animal species, 
and if they were to constitute a man-made environment for the 
human animal, this would be a non-world, the product of emana- 
tion rather than of creation. Thought is related to feeling and 
transforms its mute and inarticulate despondency, as exchange 
transforms the naked greed of desire and usage trans forms the des- 
perate longing of needs — until they all are fit to enter the world 
and to be transformed into things, to become reified. In each in- 
stance, a human capacity which by its very nature is world-open 
and communicative transcends and releases into the world a pas- 
sionate intensity from its imprisonment within the self. 

In the case of art works, reification is more than mere transfor- 
mation; it is transfiguration, a veritable metamorphosis in which it 
is as though the course of nature which wills that all fire burn to 
ashes is reverted and even dust can burst into flames. Works of 

[ 168 ] 

art are thought things, but this does not prevent their being things. 
The thought process by itself no more produces and fabricates 
tangible things, such as books, paintings, sculptures, or composi- 
tions, than usage by itself produces and fabricates houses and fur- 
niture. The reification which occurs in writing something down, 
painting an image, modeling a figure, or composing a melody is of 
course related to the thought which preceded it, but what actually 
makes the thought a reality and fabricates things of thought is the 
same workmanship which, through the primordial instrument of 
human hands, builds the other durable things of the human artifice. 

We mentioned before that this reification and materialization, 
without which no thought can become a tangible thing, is always 
paid for, and that the price is life itself: it is always the “dead 
letter” in which the “living spirit” must survive, a deadness from 
which it can be rescued only when the dead letter comes again into 
contact with a life willing to resurrect it, although this resurrection 
of the dead shares with all living things that it, too, will die again. 
This dcadness, however, though somehow present in all art and 
indicating, as it were, the distance between thought’s original home 
in the heart or head of man and its eventual destination in the 
world, varies in the different arts. In music and poetry, the least 
“materialistic” of the arts because their “material” consists of 
sounds and words, reification and the workmanship it demands are 
kept to a minimum. The young poet and the musical child prodigy 
can attain a perfection without much training and experience — a 
phenomenon hardly matched in painting, sculpture, or architecture. 

Poetry, whose material is language, is perhaps the most human 
and least worldly of the arts, the one in which the end product 
remains closest to the thought that inspired it. The durability of a 
poem is produced through condensation, so that it is as though 
language spoken in utmost density and concentration were poetic 
in itself. Here, remembrance, Mnemosyne , the mother of the muses, 
is directly transformed into memory, and the poet’s means to 
achieve the transformation is rhythm, through which the poem 
becomes fixed in the recollection almost by itself. It is this close- 
ness to living recollection that enables the poem to remain, to re- 
tain its durability, outside the printed or the written page, and 
though the “quality” of a poem may be subject to a variety of 

[ 169 ] 

standards, its “memorability” will inevitably determine its dura- 
bility, that is, its chance to be permanently fixed in the recollection 
of humanity. Of all things of thought, poetry is closest to thought, 
and a poem is less a thing than any other work of art; yet even a 
poem, no matter how long it existed as a living spoken word in the 
recollection of the bard and those who listened to him, will even- 
tually be “made,” that is, written down and transformed into a 
tangible thing among things, because remembrance and the gift of 
recollection, from which all desire for imperishability springs, need 
tangible things to remind them, lest they perish themselves.

Thought and cognition are not the same. Thought, the source 
of art works, is manifest without transformation or transfiguration 
in all great philosophy, whereas the chief manifestation of the cog- 
nitive processes, by which we acquire and store up knowledge, is 
the sciences. Cognition always pursues a definite aim, which can be 
set by practical considerations as well as by “idle curiosity”; but 
once this aim is reached, the cognitive process has come to an end. 
Thought, on the contrary, has neither an end nor an aim outside 
itself, and it does not even produce results; not only the utilitarian 
philosophy of homo faber but also the men of action and the lovers 
of results in the sciences have never tired of pointing out how en- 
tirely “useless” thought is — as useless, indeed, as the works of art 
it inspires. And not even to these useless products can thought lay 
claim, for they as well as the great philosophic systems can hardly 
be called the results of pure thinking, strictly speaking, since it is 
precisely the thought process which the artist or writing philoso- 
pher must interrupt and transform for the materializing reification 

[ 170 ] 

of his work. The activity of thinking is as relentless and repetitive 
as life itself, and the question whether thought has any meaning at 
all constitutes the same unanswerable riddle as the question for the 
meaning of life; its processes permeate the whole of human ex- 
istence so intimately that its beginning and end coincide with the 
beginning and end of human life itself. Thought, therefore, al- 
though it inspires the highest worldly productivity of homo faber, 
is by no means his prerogative; it begins to assert itself as his 
source of inspiration only where he overreaches himself, as it 
were, and begins to produce useless things, objects which are 
unrelated to material or intellectual wants, to man’s physical needs 
no less than to his thirst for knowledge. Cognition, on the other 
hand, belongs to all, and not only to intellectual or artistic work 
processes; like fabrication itself, it is a process with a beginning 
and end, whose usefulness can be tested, and which, if it produces 
no results, has failed, like a carpenter’s workmanship has failed 
when he fabricates a two-legged table. The cognitive processes in 
the sciences are basically not different from the function of cogni- 
tion in fabrication; scientific results produced through cognition 
are added to the human artifice like all other things. 

Both thought and cognition, furthermore, must be distinguished 
from the power of logical reasoning which is manifest in such oper- 
ations as deductions from axiomatic or self-evident statements, 
subsumption of particular occurrences under general rules, or the 
techniques of spinning out consistent chains of conclusions. In 
these human faculties we are actually confronted with a sort of 
brain power which in more than one respect resembles nothing so 
much as the labor power the human animal develops in its metabo- 
lism with nature. The mental processes which feed on brain power 
we usually call intelligence, and this intelligence can indeed be 
measured by intelligence tests as bodily strength can be measured 
by other devices. Their laws, the laws of logic, can be discovered 
like other laws of nature because they are ultimately rooted in the 
structure of the human brain, and they possess, for the normally 
healthy individual, the same force of compulsion as the driving 
necessity which regulates the other functions of our bodies. It is in 
the structure of the human brain to be compelled to admit that two 
and two equal four. If it were true that man is an animal rationale in 

[ 171 ]

the sense in which the modern age understood the term, namely, an 
animal species which differs from other animals in that it is en- 
dowed with superior brain power, then the newly invented elec- 
tronic machines, which, sometimes to the dismay and sometimes to 
the confusion of their inventors, are so spectacularly more “intelli- 
gent” than human beings, would indeed be homunculi. As it is, they 
are, like all machines, mere substitutes and artificial improvers of 
human labor power, following the time-honored device of all divi- 
sion of labor to break down every operation into its simplest con- 
stituent motions, substituting, for instance, repeated addition for 
multiplication. The superior power of the machine is manifest in its 
speed, which is far greater than that of human brain power; be- 
cause of this superior speed, the machine can dispense with multi- 
plication, which is the pre-electronic technical device to speed up 
addition. All that the giant computers prove is that the modern age 
was wrong to believe with Hobbes that rationality, in the sense of 
“reckoning with consequences,” is the highest and most human of 
man’s capacities, and that the life and labor philosophers, Marx or 
Bergson or Nietzsche, were right to see in this type of intelligence, 
which they mistook for reason, a mere function of the life process 
itself, or, as Hume put it, a mere “slave of the passions.” Ob- 
viously, this brain power and the compelling logical processes it 
generates are not capable of erecting a world, are as worldless as 
the compulsory processes of life, labor, and consumption. 

One of the striking discrepancies in classical economics is that 
the same theorists who prided themselves on the consistency of 
their utilitarian outlook frequently took a very dim view of sheer 
utility. As a rule, they were well aware that the specific productiv- 
ity of work lies less in its usefulness than in its capacity for produc- 
ing durability. By this discrepancy, they tacitly admit the lack of 
realism in their own utilitarian philosophy. For although the dura- 
bility of ordinary things is but a feeble reflection of the permanence 
of which the most worldly of all things, works of art, are capable, 
something of this quality — which to Plato was divine because it 
approaches immortality— is inherent in every thing as a thing, and 
it is precisely this quality or the lack of it that shines forth in its 
shape and makes it beautiful or ugly. To be sure, an ordinary use 
object is not and should not be intended to be beautiful; yet what- 

[ 172 ] 

ever has a shape at all and is seen cannot help being either beautiful, 
ugly, or something in-between. Everything that is, must appear, 
and nothing can appear without a shape of its own; hence there 
is in fact no thing that does not in some way transcend its func- 
tional use, and its transcendence, its beauty or ugliness, is iden- 
tical with appearing publicly and being seen. By the same token, 
namely, in its sheer worldly existence, every thing also tran- 
scends the sphere of pure instrumentality once it is completed. 

The standard by which a thing’s excellence is judged is never mere 
usefulness, as though an ugly table will fulfil the same function as a 
handsome one, but its adequacy or inadequacy to what it should 
look like, and this is, in Platonic language, nothing but its adequacy 
or inadequacy to the eidos or idea, the mental image, or rather the 
image seen by the inner eye, that preceded its coming into the 
world and survives its potential destruction. In other words, even 
use objects are judged not only according to the subjective needs of 
men but by the objective standards of the world where they will 
find their place, to last, to be seen, and to be used. 

The man-made world of things, the human artifice erected by 
homo faber, becomes a home for mortal men, whose stability will 
endure and outlast the ever-changing movement of their lives and 
actions, only insomuch as it transcends both the sheer functional- 
ism of things produced for consumption and the sheer utility of 
objects produced for use. Life in its non-biological sense, the span 
of time each man has between birth and death, manifests itself in 
action and speech, both of which share with life its essential futil- 
ity. The “doing of great deeds and the speaking of great words” 
will leave no trace, no product that might endure after the moment 
of action and the spoken word has passed. If the animal laborans 
needs the help of homo faber to ease his labor and remove his pain, 
and if mortals need his help to erect a home on earth, acting and 
speaking men need the help of homo faber in his highest capacity, 
that is, the help of the artist, of poets and historiographers, of 
monument-builders or writers, because without them the only 
product of their activity, the story they enact and tell, would not 
survive at all. In order to be what the world is always meant to be, 
a home for men during their life on earth, the human artifice must 
be a place fit for action and speech, for activities not only entirely 

[ 173 ] 

useless for the necessities of life but of an entirely different nature 
from the manifold activities of fabrication by which the world it- 
self and all things in it are produced. We need not choose here be- 
tween Plato and Protagoras, or decide whether man or a god 
should be the measure of all things; what is certain is that the 
measure can be neither the driving necessity of biological life and 
labor nor the utilitarian instrumentalism of fabrication and usage. 


[ 174 ] 


[[CHAPTER V: Action]]

[[[THE DISCLOSURE OF THE AGENT IN SPEECH AND ACTION]]]

Human plurality, the basic condition of both action and speech, 
has the twofold character of equality and distinction. If men were 
not equal, they could neither understand each other and those 
who came before them nor plan for the future and foresee the 
needs of those who will come after them. If men were not dis- 
tinct, each human being distinguished from any other who is, was, 
or will ever be, they would need neither speech nor action to 

[ 175 ] 

make themselves understood. Signs and sounds to communicate 
immediate, identical needs and wants would be enough. 

Human distinctness is not the same as otherness-— the curious 
quality of alteritas possessed by everything that is and therefore, 
in medieval philosophy, one of the four basic, universal charac- 
teristics of Being, transcending every particular quality. Other- 
ness, it is true, is an important aspect of plurality, the reason why 
all our definitions are distinctions, why we are unable to say what 
anything is without distinguishing it from something else. Other- 
ness in its most abstract form is found only in the sheer multipli- 
cation of inorganic objects, whereas all organic life already shows 
variations and distinctions, even between specimens of the same 
species. But only man can express this distinction and distinguish 
himself, and only he can communicate himself and not merely 
something — thirst or hunger, affection or hostility or fear. In man, 
otherness, which he shares with everything that is, and distinct- 
ness, which he shares with everything alive, become uniqueness, 
and human plurality is the paradoxical plurality of unique beings. 

Speech and action reveal this unique distinctness. Through 
them, men distinguish themselves instead of being merely dis- 
tinct; they are the modes in which human beings appear to each 
other, not indeed as physical objects, but qua men. This appear- 
ance, as distinguished from mere bodily existence, rests on 
initiative, but it is an initiative from which no human being can 
refrain and still be human. This is true of no other activity in the 
vita activa. Men can very well live without laboring, they can | 
force others to labor for them, and they can very well decide 
merely to use and enjoy the world of things without themselves 
adding a single useful object to it; the life of an exploiter or slave- 
holder and the life of a parasite may be unjust, but they certainly 
are human. A life without speech and without action, on the other 
hand — and this is the only way of life that in earnest has re- 
nounced all appearance and all vanity in the biblical sense of the 
word— is literally dead to the world; it has ceased to be a human 
life because it is no longer lived among men. 

With word and deed we insert ourselves into the human world, 
and this insertion is like a second birth, in which we confirm and 
take upon ourselves the naked fact of our original physical ap- 

[ 176 ]

pearance. This insertion is not forced upon us by necessity, like 
labor, and it is not prompted by utility, like work. It may be 
stimulated by the presence of others whose company we may wish 
to join, but it is never conditioned by them; its impulse springs 
from the beginning which came into the world when we were 
born and to which we respond by beginning something new on 
our own initiative. To act, in its most general sense, means to 
take an initiative, to begin (as the Greek word archein, “to begin,” 
“to lead,” and eventually “to rule,” indicates), to set something 
into motion (which is the original meaning of the Latin agere). 
Because they are initium , newcomers and beginners by virtue of 
birth, men take initiative, are prompted into action. [ Initium ] ergo 
vt esset, creatus est homo, ante quem nullus fuit (“that there be a 
beginning, man was created before whom there was nobody”), 
said Augustine in his political philosophy. This beginning is not 
the same as the beginning of the world; it is not the beginning of 
something but of somebody, who is a beginner himself. With the 
creation of man, the principle of beginning came into the world 
itself, which, of course, is only another way of saying that the 
principle of freedom was created when man was created but not 
before. 

It is in the nature of beginning that something new is started 

[ 177 ] 

which cannot be expected from whatever may have happened 
before. This character of startling unexpectedness is inherent in 
all beginnings and in all origins. Thus, the origin of life from 
inorganic matter is an infinite improbability of inorganic proc- 
esses, as is the coming into being of the earth viewed from the 
standpoint of processes in the universe, or the evolution of human 
out of animal life. The new always happens against the over- 
whelming odds of statistical laws and their probability, which for 
all practical, everyday purposes amounts to certainty; the new 
therefore always appears in the guise of a miracle. The fact that 
man is capable of action means that the unexpected can be expected 
from him, that he is able to perform what is infinitely improbable. 
And this again is possible only because each man is unique, so 
that with each birth something uniquely new comes into the 
world. With respect to this somebody who is unique it can be 
truly said that nobody was there before. If action as beginning 
corresponds to the fact of birth, if it is the actualization of the 
human condition of natality, then speech corresponds to the fact 
of distinctness and is the actualization of the human condition of 
plurality, that is, of living as a distinct and unique being among 
equals. 

Action and speech are so closely related because the primordial 
and specifically human act must at the same time contain the 
answer to the question asked of every newcomer: “Who are 
you?” This disclosure of who somebody is, is implicit in both his 
words and his deeds; yet obviously the affinity between speech 
and revelation is much closer than that between action and reve- 
lation, just as the affinity between action and beginning is closer 
than that between speech and beginning, although many, and even 
most acts, are performed in the manner of speech. Without the 
accompaniment of speech, at any rate, action would not only lose 
its revelatory character, but, and by the same token, it would lose 
its subject, as it were; not acting men but performing robots 
would achieve what, humanly speaking, would remain incompre- 
hensible. Speechless action would no longer be action because 
there would no longer be an actor, and the actor, the doer of 

[ 178 ] 

deeds, is possible only if he is at the same time the speaker of 
words. The action he begins is humanly disclosed by the word, 
and though his deed can be perceived in its brute physical appear- 
ance without verbal accompaniment, it becomes relevant only 
through the spoken word in which he identifies himself as the 
actor, announcing what he does, has done, and intends to do. 

No other human performance requires speech to the same 
extent as action. In all other performances speech plays a subordi- 
nate role, as a means of communication or a mere accompaniment 
to something that could also be achieved in silence. It is true that 
speech is extremely useful as a means of communication and in- 
formation, but as such it could be replaced by a sign language, 
which then might prove to be even more useful and expedient to 
convey certain meanings, as in mathematics and other scientific 
disciplines or in certain forms of teamwork. Thus, it is also true 
that man’s capacity to act, and especially to act in concert, is 
extremely useful for purposes of self-defense or of pursuit of 
interests; but if nothing more were at stake here than to use action 
as a means to an end, it is obvious that the same end could be 
much more easily attained in mute violence, so that action seems 
a not very efficient substitute for violence, just as speech, from 
the viewpoint of sheer utility, seems an awkward substitute for 
sign language. 

In acting and speaking, men show who they are, reveal actively 
their unique personal identities and thus make their appearance in 
the human world, while their physical identities appear without 
any activity of their own in the unique shape of the body and 
sound of the voice. This disclosure of “who” in contradistinction 
to “what” somebody is — his qualities, gifts, talents, and short- 
comings, which he may display or hide — is implicit in everything 
somebody says and does. It can be hidden only in complete silence 
and perfect passivity, but its disclosure can almost never be 
achieved as a wilful purpose, as though one possessed and could 
dispose of this “who” in the same manner he has and can dispose 
of his qualities. On the contrary, it is more than likely that the 
“who,” which appears so clearly and unmistakably to others, 
remains hidden from the person himself, like the daimon in Greek 
religion which accompanies each man throughout his life, always 

[ 179 ]

looking over his shoulder from behind and thus visible only to those 
he encounters. 

This revelatory quality of speech and action comes to the fore 
where people are with others and neither for nor against them — 
that is, in sheer human togetherness. Although nobody knows 
whom he reveals when he discloses himself in deed or word, he 
must be willing to risk the disclosure, and this neither the doer of 
good works, who must be without self and preserve complete 
anonymity, nor the criminal, who must hide himsell: from others, 
can take upon themselves. Both are lonely figures, the one being 
for, the other against, all men; they, therefore, remain outside the 
pale of human intercourse and are, politically, marginal figures 
who usually enter the historical scene in times of corruption, dis- 
integration, and political bankruptcy. Because of its inherent 
tendency to disclose the agent together with the act, action needs 
for its full appearance the shining brightness we once called glory, 
and which is possible only in the public realm. 

Without the disclosure of the agent in the act, action loses its 
specific character and becomes one form of achievement among 
others. It is then indeed no less a means to an end than making is 
a means to produce an object. This happens whenever human 
togetherness is lost, that is, when people are only for or against 
other people, as for instance in modern warfare, where men go 
into action and use means of violence in order to achieve certain 
objectives for their own side and against the enemy. In these 
instances, which of course have always existed, speech becomes 
indeed “mere talk,” simply one more means toward the end, 
whether it serves to deceive the enemy or to dazzle everybody 
with propaganda; here words reveal nothing, disclosure comes 
only from the deed itself, and this achievement, like all other 
achievements, cannot disclose the “who,” the unique and distinct 
identity of the agent. 

In these instances action has lost the quality through which it 
transcends mere productive activity, which, from the humble 
making of use objects to the inspired creation of art works, has 
no more meaning than is revealed in the finished product and does 
not intend to show more than is plainly visible at the end of the 
production process. Action without a name, a “who” attached to 

[ 180 ] 

it, is meaningless, whereas an art work retains its relevance 
whether or not we know the master’s name. The monuments to 
the “Unknown Soldier” after World War I bear testimony to the 
then still existing need for glorification, for finding a “who,” an 
identifiable somebody whom four years of mass slaughter should 
have revealed. The frustration of this wish and the unwillingness 
to resign oneself to the brutal fact that the agent of the war was 
actually nobody inspired the erection of the monuments to the 
“unknown,” to all those whom the war had failed to make known 
and had robbed thereby, not of their achievement, but of their 
human dignity.


[[[THE WEB OF RELATIONSHIPS AND THE ENACTED STORIES]]]

The manifestation of who the speaker and doer unexchangeably 
is, though it is plainly visible, retains a curious intangibility that 
confounds all efforts toward unequivocal verbal expression. The 
moment we want to say who somebody is, our very vocabulary 
leads us astray into saying what he is; we get entangled in a de- 
scription of qualities he necessarily shares with others like him; 
we begin to describe a type or a “character” in the old meaning 
of the word, with the result that his specific uniqueness escapes us. 

This frustration has the closest affinity with the well-known 
philosophic impossibility to arrive at a definition of man, all defi- 
nitions being determinations or interpretations of what man is, of 
qualities, therefore, which he could possibly share with other 
living beings, whereas his specific difference would be found in 
a determination of what kind of a “who” he is. Yet apart from 
this philosophic perplexity, the impossibility, as it were, to 
solidify in words the living essence of the person as it shows 
itself in the flux of action and speech, has great bearing upon the 
whole realm of human affairs, where we exist primarily as acting 
and speaking beings. It excludes in principle our ever being able 
to handle these affairs as we handle things whose nature is at our 

[ 181 ]

disposal because we can name them. The point is that the manifes- 
tation of the “who” comes to pass in the same manner as the no- 
toriously unreliable manifestations of ancient oracles, which, ac- 
cording to Heraclitus, “neither reveal nor hide in words, but give 
manifest signs .” This is a basic factor in the equally notorious 
uncertainty not only of all political matters, but of all affairs that 
go on between men directly, without the intermediary, stabilizing, 
and solidifying influence of things.

This is only the first of many frustrations by which action, and 
consequently the togetherness and intercourse of men, are ridden. 
It is perhaps the most fundamental of those we shall deal with, in 
so far as it does not rise out of comparisons with more reliable 
and productive activities, such as fabrication or contemplation or 
cognition or even labor, but indicates something that frustrates 
action in terms of its own purposes. What is at stake is the revela- 
tory character without which action and speech would lose all 
human relevance. 

Action and speech go on between men, as they are directed 
toward them, and they retain their agent-revealing capacity even 
if their content is exclusively “objective,” concerned with the 
matters of the world of things in which men move, which physi- 
cally lies between them and out of which arise their specific, ob- 
jective, worldly interests. These interests constitute, in the word’s 
most literal significance, something which inter-est, which lies be- 
tween people and therefore can relate and bind them together. 
Most action and speech is concerned with this in-between, which 
varies with each group of people, so that most words and deeds 
are about some worldly objective reality in addition to being a 
disclosure of the acting and speaking agent. Since this disclosure 
of the subject is an integral part of all, even the most “objective” 
intercourse, the physical, worldy in-between along with its inter- 

[ 162 ] 

ests is overlaid and, as it were, overgrown with an altogether dif- 
ferent in-between which consists of deeds and words and owes 
its origin exclusively to men’s acting and speaking directly to one 
another. This second, subjective in-between is not tangible, since 
there are no tangible objects into which it could solidify; the 
process of acting and speaking can leave behind no such results 
and end products. But for all its intangibility, this in-between is 
no less real than the world of things we visibly have in common. 
We call this reality the “web” of human relationships, indicating 
by the metaphor its somewhat intangible quality. 

To be sure, this web is no less bound to the objective world of 
things than speech is to the existence of a living body, but the rela- 
tionship is not like that of a fagade or, in Marxian terminology, 
of an essentially superfluous superstructure affixed to the useful 
structure of the building itself. The basic error of all materialism 
in politics — and this materialism is not Marxian and not even 
modern in origin, but as old as our history of political theory — 
is to overlook the inevitability with which men disclose them- 
selves as subjects, as distinct and unique persons, even when they 
wholly concentrate upon reaching an altogether worldly, material 
object. To dispense with this disclosure, if indeed it could ever be 
done, would mean to transform men into something they are not; 
to deny, on the other hand, that this disclosure is real and has 
consequences of its own is simply unrealistic. 

The realm of human affairs, strictly speaking, consists of the 


[ 163 ]

web of human relationships which exists wherever men live to- 
gether. The disclosure of the “who” through speech, and the 
setting of a new beginning through action, always fall into an 
already existing web where their immediate consequences can be 
felt. Together they start a new process which eventually emerges 
as the unique life story of the newcomer, affecting uniquely the 
life stories of all those with whom he comes into contact. It is 
because of this already existing web of human relationships, with 
its innumerable, conflicting wills and intentions, that action al- 
most never achieves its purpose; but it is also because of this 
medium, in which action alone is real, that it “produces” stories 
with or without intention as naturally as fabrication produces 
tangible things. These stories may then be recorded in documents 
and monuments, they may be visible in use objects or art works, 
they may be told and retold and worked into all kinds of material. 
They themselves, in their living reality, are of an altogether dif- 
ferent nature than these reifications. They tell us more about their 
subjects, the “hero” in the center of each story, than any product 
of human hands ever tells us about the master who produced it, 
and yet they are not products, properly speaking. Although 
everybody started his life by inserting himself into the human 
world through action and speech, nobody is the author or producer 
of his own life story. In other words, the stories, the results of 
action and speech, reveal an agent, but this agent is not an author 
or producer. Somebody began it and is its subject in the twofold 
sense of the word, namely, its actor and sufferer, but nobody is 
its author. 

That every individual life between birth and death can even- 
tually be told as a story with beginning and end is the prepolitical 
and prehistorical condition of history, the great story without 
beginning and end. But the reason why each human life tells its 
story and why history ultimately becomes the storybook of man- 
kind, with many actors and speakers and yet without any tangible 
authors, is that both are the outcome of action. For the great 
unknown in history, that has baffled the philosophy of history in 
the modern age, arises not only when one considers history as a 
whole and finds that its subject, mankind, is an abstraction which 
never can become an active agent; the same unknown has baffled 

[ 184 ] 

political philosophy from its beginning in antiquity and contrib- 
uted to the general contempt in which philosophers since Plato 
have held the realm of human affairs. The perplexity is that in 
any series of events that together form a story with a unique mean- 
ing we can at best isolate the agent who set the whole process into 
motion; and although this agent frequently remains the subject, 
the “hero” of the story, we never can point unequivocally to him 
as the author of its eventual outcome. 

It is for this reason that Plato thought that human affairs (ta ton 
anthropon pragmata ) , the outcome of action (praxis ) , should not be 
treated with great seriousness; the actions of men appear like the 
gestures of puppets led by an invisible hand behind the scene, so 
that man seems to be a kind of plaything of a god . It is note- 
worthy that Plato, who had no inkling of the modern concept of 
history, should have been the first to invent the metaphor of an 
actor behind the scenes who, behind the backs of acting men, pulls 
the strings and is responsible for the story. The Platonic god is 
but a symbol for the fact that real stories, in distinction from those 
we invent, have no author; as such, he is the true forerunner of 
Providence, the “invisible hand,” Nature, the ‘ world spirit, 
class interest, and the like, with which Christian and modern 
philosophers of history tried to solve the perplexing problem that 
although history owes its existence to men, it is still obviously 
not “made” by them. (Nothing in fact indicates more clearly the 
political nature of history— its being a story of action and deeds 
rather than of trends and forces or ideas — than the introduction of 
an invisible actor behind the scenes whom we find in all philoso- 
phies of history, which for this reason alone can be recognized as 
political philosophies in disguise. By the same token, the simple 
fact that Adam Smith needed an “invisible hand” to guide econom- 
ic dealings on the exchange market shows plainly that more than 
sheer economic activity is involved in exchange and that eco- 
nomic man,” when he makes his appearance on the market, is an 
acting being and neither exclusively a producer nor a trader and 
barterer.) 

The invisible actor behind the scenes is an invention arising from 
a mental perplexity but corresponding to no real experience. 

[ 185 ] 

Through it, the story resulting from action is misconstrued as a 
fictional story, where indeed an author pulls the strings and directs 
the play. The fictional story reveals a maker just as every work 
of art clearly indicates that it was made by somebody, this does 
not belong to the character of the story itself but only to the mode 
in which it came into existence. The distinction between a real 
and a fictional story is precisely that the latter was “made up” 
and the former not made at all. The real story in which we are 
engaged as long as we live has no visible or invisible maker be- 
cause it is not made. The only “somebody” it reveals is its hero, 
and it is the only medium in which the originally intangible mani- 
festation of a uniquely distinct “who” can become tangible ex 
post facto through action and speech. Who somebody is or was we 
can know only by knowing the story of which he is himself the 
hero — his biography, in other words; everything else we know 
of him, including the work he may have produced and left behind, 
tells us only what he is or was. Thus, although we know much 
less of Socrates, who did not write a single line and left no work 
behind, than of Plato or Aristotle, we know much better and more 
intimately who he was, because we know his story, than we know 
who Aristotle was, about whose opinions we are so much better 
informed. 

The hero the story discloses needs no heroic qualities; the word 
“hero” originally, that is, in Homer, was no more than a name 
given each free man who participated in the Trojan enterprise  
and about whom a story could be told. The connotation of cour- 
age, which we now feel to be an indispensable quality of the hero, 
is in fact already present in a willingness to act and speak at all, 
to insert one’s self into the world and begin a story of one’s own. 
And this courage is not necessarily or even primarily related to a 
willingness to suffer the consequences; courage and even boldness 
are already present in leaving one’s private hiding place and show- 
ing who one is, in disclosing and exposing one’s self. The extent 
of this original courage, without which action and speech and 

[ 186 ] 

therefore, according to the Greeks, freedom, would not be pos- 
sible at all, is not less great and may even be greater if the “hero” 
happens to be a coward. 

The specific content as well as the general meaning of action 
and speech may take various forms of reification in art works 
which glorify a deed or an accomplishment and, by transformation 
and condensation, show some extraordinary event in its full sig- 
nificance. However, the specific revelatory quality of action and 
speech, the implicit manifestation of the agent and speaker, is so 
indissolubly tied to the living flux of acting and speaking that it can 
be represented and “reified” only through a kind of repetition, 
the imitation or mimesis, which according to Aristotle prevails in 
all arts but is actually appropriate only to the drama , whose very 
name (from the Greek verb dran, “to act”) indicates that play- 
acting actually is an imitation of acting. But the imitative ele- 
ment lies not only in the art of the actor, but, as Aristotle rightly 
claims, in the making or writing of the play, at least to the extent 
that the drama comes fully to life only when it is enacted in the 
theater. Only the actors and speakers who re-enact the story’s 
plot can convey the full meaning, not so much of the story itself, 
but of the “heroes” who reveal themselves in it. In terms of 
Greek tragedy, this would mean that the story’s direct as well as 
its universal meaning is revealed by the chorus, which does not 
imitate and whose comments are pure poetry, whereas the in- 
tangible identities of the agents in the story, since they escape all 

[ 187 ]

generalization and therefore all reification, can be conveyed only 
through an imitation of their acting. This is also why the theater 
is the political art par excellence; only there is the political sphere 
of human life transposed into art. By the same token, it is the 
only art whose sole subject is man in his relationship to others. 

[[[THE FRAILTY OF HUMAN AFFAIRS]]]

Action, as distinguished from fabrication, is never possible in 
isolation; to be isolated is to be deprived of the capacity to act. 
Action and speech need the surrounding presence of others no less 
than fabrication needs the surrounding presence of nature for its 
material, and of a world in which to place the finished product. 
Fabrication is surrounded by and in constant contact with the 
world: action and speech are surrounded by and in constant con- 
tact with the web of the acts and words of other men. The popular 
belief in a “strong man” who, isolated against others, owes his 
strength to his being alone is either sheer superstition, based on 
the delusion that we can “make” something in the realm of human 
affairs — “make” institutions or laws, for instance, as we make 
tables and chairs, or make men “better” or “worse” — or it is 
conscious despair of all action, political and non-political, coupled 
with the utopian hope that it may be possible to treat men as one 
treats other “material.” The strength the individual needs for 
every process of production becomes altogether worthless when 
action is at stake, regardless of whether this strength is intellec- 
tual or a matter of purely material force. History is full of ex- 

[ 188 ] 

amples of the impotence of the strong and superior man who does 
not know how to enlist the help, the co-acting of his fellow men. 
His failure is frequently blamed upon the fatal inferiority of the 
many and the resentment every outstanding person inspires in 
those who are mediocre. Yet true as such observations are bound 
to be, they do not touch the heart of the matter. 

In order to illustrate what is at stake here we may remember 
that Greek and Latin, unlike the modern languages, contain two 
altogether different and yet interrelated words with which to des- 
ignate the verb “to act.” To the two Greek verbs archein (“to 
begin,” “to lead,” finally “to rule”) and pattern (“to pass 
through,” “to achieve,” “to finish”) correspond the two Latin 
verbs agere (“to set into motion,” “to lead”) and genre (whose 
original meaning is “to bear ”). Here it seems as though each 
action were divided into two parts, the beginning made by a 
single person and the achievement in which many join by bear- 
ing” and “finishing” the enterprise, by seeing it through. Not 
only are the words interrelated in a similar manner, the history 
of their usage is very similar too. In both cases the word that 
originally designated only the second part of action, its achieve- 
ment — pattern and gerere — became the accepted word for action 
in general, whereas the words designating the beginning of action 
became specialized in meaning, at least in political language. 
Archein came to mean chiefly “to rule” and “to lead” when it 
was specifically used, and agere came to mean “to lead” rather 
than “to set into motion.” 

Thus the role of the beginner and leader, who was a primus 
inter pares (in the case of Homer, a king among kings) , changed 
into that of a ruler; the original interdependence of action, the 
dependence of the beginner and leader upon others for help and 
the dependence of his followers upon him for an occasion to act 
themselves, split into two altogether different functions: the func- 
tion of giving commands, which became the prerogative of the 
ruler, and the function of executing them, which became the duty 
of his subjects. This ruler is alone, isolated against others by his 
force, just as the beginner was isolated through his initiative at 

[ 189 ] 

the start, before he had found others to join him. Yet the strength 
of the beginner and leader shows itself only in his initiative and 
the risk he takes, not in the actual achievement. In the case of 
the successful ruler, he may claim for himself what actually is the 
achievement of many — something that Agamemnon, who was a 
king but no ruler, would never have been permitted. Through 
this claim, the ruler monopolizes, so to speak, the strength of 
those without whose help he would never be able to achieve 
anything. Thus, the delusion of extraordinary strength arises and 
with it the fallacy of the strong man who is powerful because he 
is alone. 

Because the actor always moves among and in relation to other 
acting beings, he is never merely a “doer” but always and at the 
same time a sufferer. To do and to suffer are like opposite sides 
of the same coin, and the story that an act starts is composed of 
its consequent deeds and sufferings. These consequences are 
boundless, because action, though it may proceed from nowhere, 
so to speak, acts into a medium where every reaction becomes a 
chain reaction and where every process is the cause of new proc- 
esses. Since action acts upon beings who are capable of their own 
actions, reaction, apart from being a response, is always a new 
action that strikes out on its own and affects others. Thus action 
and reaction among men never move in a closed circle and can 
never be reliably confined to two partners. This boundlessness is 
characteristic not of political action alone, in the narrower sense 
of the word, as though the boundlessness of human interrelated- 
ness were only the result of the boundless multitude of people 
involved, which could be escaped by resigning oneself to action 
within a limited, graspable framework of circumstances; the 
smallest act in the most limited circumstances bears the seed of 
the same boundlessness, because one deed, and sometimes one 
word, suffices to change every constellation. 

Action, moreover, no matter what its specific content, always 
establishes relationships and therefore has an inherent tendency to 
force open all limitations and cut across all boundaries. Limita- 

[ 190 ]

tions and boundaries exist within the realm of human affairs, but 
they never offer a framework that can reliably withstand the on- 
slaught with which each new generation must insert itself. The 
frailty of human institutions and laws and, generally, of all matters 
pertaining to men’s living together, arises from the human condi- 
tion of natality and is quite independent of the frailty of human 
nature. The fences inclosing private property and insuring the 
limitations of each household, the territorial boundaries which pro- 
tect and make possible the physical identity of a people, and the 
laws which protect and make possible its political existence, are 
of such great importance to the stability of human affairs precisely 
because no such limiting and protecting principles rise out of the 
activities going on in the realm of human affairs itself. The limita- 
tions of the law are never entirely reliable safeguards against ac- 
tion from within the body politic, just as the boundaries of the 
territory are never entirely reliable safeguards against action from 
without. The boundlessness of action is only the other side of its 
tremendous capacity for establishing relationships, that is, its 
specific productivity; this is why the old virtue of moderation, of 
keeping within bounds, is indeed one of the political virtues par 
excellence, just as the political temptation par excellence is indeed 
hubris (as the Greeks, fully experienced in the potentialities of 
action, knew so well) and not the will to power, as we are inclined 
to believe. 

Yet while the various limitations and boundaries we find in 
every body politic may offer some protection against the inherent 
boundlessness of action, they are altogether helpless to offset its 
second outstanding character: its inherent unpredictability. This 
is not simply a question of inability to foretell all the logical con- 
sequences of a particular act, in which case an electronic com- 
puter would be able to foretell the future, but arises directly out 
of the story which, as the result of action, begins and establishes 

[ 191 ] 

itself as soon as the fleeting moment of the deed is past. The 
trouble is that whatever the character and content of the subse- 
quent story may be, whether it is played in private or public life, 
whether it involves many or few actors, its full meaning can reveal 
itself only when it has ended. In contradistinction to fabrication, 
where the light by which to judge the finished product is provided 
by the image or model perceived beforehand by the craftsman’s 
eye, the light that illuminates processes of action, and therefore 
all historical processes, appears only at their end, frequently when 
all the participants are dead. Action reveals itself fully only to the 
storyteller, that is, to the backward glance of the historian, who 
indeed always knows better what it was all about than the par- 
ticipants. All accounts told by the actors themselves, though they 
may in rare cases give an entirely trustworthy statement of in- 
tentions, aims, and motives, become mere useful source material 
in the historian’s hands and can never match his story in signifi- 
cance and truthfulness. What the storyteller narrates must neces- 
sarily be hidden from the actor himself, at least as long as he is 
in the act or caught in its consequences, because to him the mean- 
ingfulness of his act is not in the story that follows. Even though 
stories are the inevitable results of action, it is not the actor but 
the storyteller who perceives and “makes” the story. 

[[[THE GREEK SOLUTION]]]

This unpredictability of outcome is closely related to the revela- 
tory character of action and speech, in which one discloses one’s 
self without ever either knowing himself or being able to calcu- 
late beforehand whom he reveals. The ancient saying that nobody 
can be called eudaimm before he is dead may point to the issue at 
stake, if we could hear its original meaning after two and a half 
thousand years of hackneyed repetition; not even its Latin trans- 
lation, proverbial and trite already in Rome — nemo ante mortem 
beatus esse diet potest — conveys this meaning, although it may have 
inspired the practice of the Catholic Church to beatify her saints 
only after they have long been safely dead. For eudaimonia means 
neither happiness nor beatitude; it cannot be translated and per- 

[ 192 ] 

haps cannot even be explained. It has the connotation of blessed- 
ness, but without any religious overtones, and it means literally 
something like the well-being of the daimdn who accompanies 
each man throughout life, who is his distinct identity, but appears 
and is visible only to others. Unlike happiness, therefore, which 
is a passing mood, and unlike good fortune, which one may have 
at certain periods of life and lack in others, eudaimonia , like life 
itself, is a lasting state of being which is neither subject to change 
nor capable of effecting change. To be eudaimon and to have been 
eudaimon, according to Aristotle, are the same, just as to “live 
well” (eu dzen) and to have “lived well” are the same as long as 
life lasts; they are not states or activities which change a person’s 
quality, such as learning and having learned, which indicate two 
altogether different attributes of the same person at different 
moments.

This unchangeable identity of the person, though disclosing 
itself intangibly in act and speech, becomes tangible only in the 
story of the actor’s and speaker’s life; but as such it can be known, 
that is, grasped as a palpable entity only after it has come to its 
end. In other words, human essence — no't human nature in gen- 
eral (which does not exist) nor the sum total of qualities and 
shortcomings in the individual, but the essence of who somebody 
is — can come into being only when life departs, leaving behind 
nothing but a story. Therefore whoever consciously aims at being 
“essential,” at leaving behind a story and an identity which will 
win “immortal fame,” must not only risk his life but expressly 
choose, as Achilles did, a short life and premature death. Only a 
man who does not survive his one supreme act remains the indis- 
putable master of his identity and possible greatness, because he 
withdraws into death from the possible consequences and con- 

[ 193 ] 

tinuation of what he began. What gives the story of Achilles its 
paradigmatic significance is that it shows in a nutshell that eudai- 
monia can be bought only at the price of life and that one can make 
sure of it only by foregoing the continuity of living in which we 
disclose ourselves piecemeal, by summing up all of one’s life in a 
single deed, so that the story of the act comes to its end together 
with life itself. Even Achilles, it is true, remains dependent upon 
the storyteller, poet, or historian, without whom everything he 
did remains futile; but he is the only “hero,” and therefore the 
hero par excellence, who delivers into the narrator’s hands the 
full significance of his deed, so that it is as though he had not 
merely enacted the story of his life but at the same time also 
“made” it. 

No doubt this concept of action is highly individualistic, as we 
would say today. It stresses the urge toward self-disclosure at 
the expense of all other factors and therefore remains relatively 
untouched by the predicament of unpredictability. As such it be- 
came the prototype of action for Greek antiquity and influenced, 
in the form of the so-called agonal spirit, the passionate drive to 
show one’s self in measuring up against others that underlies the 
concept of politics prevalent in the city-states. An outstanding 
symptom of this prevailing influence is that the Greeks, in dis- 
tinction from all later developments, did not count legislating 
among the political activities. In their opinion, the lawmaker was 
like the builder of the city wall, someone who had to do and finish 
his work before political activity could begin. He therefore was 
treated like any other craftsman or architect and could be called 
from abroad and commissioned without having to be a citizen, 
whereas the right to politeuesthai , to engage in the numerous ac- 
tivities which eventually went on in the polis, was entirely re- 
stricted to citizens. To them, the laws, like the wall around the 
city, were not results of action but products of making. Before 
men began to act, a definite space had to be secured and a struc- 
ture built where all subsequent actions could take place, the space 

[ 194 ] 

being the public realm of the polls and its structure the law; legis- 
lator and architect belonged in the same category. But these 
tangible entities themselves were not the content of politics (not 
Athens, but the Athenians, were the polls), and they did not 
command the same loyalty we know from the Roman type of 
patriotism. 

Though it is true that Plato and Aristotle elevated lawmaking 
and city-building to the highest rank in political life, this does not 
indicate that they enlarged the fundamental Greek experiences of 
action and politics to comprehend what later turned out to be the 
political genius of Rome: legislation and foundation. The Socratic 
school, on the contrary, turned to these activities, which to the 
Greeks were prepolitical, because they wished to turn against 
politics and against action. To them, legislating and the execution 
of decisions by vote are the most legitimate political activities 
because in them men “act like craftsmen”: the result of their ac- 
tion is a tangible product, and its process has a clearly recogniz- 
able end. This is no longer or, rather, not yet action (praxis), 
properly speaking, but making (poiesis ), which they prefer be- 
cause of its greater reliability. It is as though they had said that 
if men only renounce their capacity for action, with its futility, 
boundlessness, and uncertainty of outcome, there could be a 
remedy for the frailty of human affairs. 

How this remedy can destroy the very substance of human re- 
lationships is perhaps best illustrated in one of the rare instances 

[ 195 ] 

where Aristotle draws an example of acting from the sphere of 
private life, in the relationship between the benefactor and his 
recipient. With that candid absence of moralizing that is the mark 
of Greek, though not of Roman, antiquity, he states first as a 
matter of fact that the benefactor always loves those he has 
helped more than he is loved by them. He then goes on to explain 
that this is only natural, since the benefactor has done a work, an 
ergon, while the recipient has only endured his beneficence. The 
benefactor, according to Aristotle, loves his “work,” the life of 
the recipient which he has “made,” as the poet loves his poems, 
and he reminds his readers that the poet’s love for his work is 
hardly less passionate than a mother’s love for her children. This 
explanation shows clearly that he thinks of acting in terms of 
making, and of its result, the relationship between men, in terms 
of an accomplished “work” (his emphatic attempts to distinguish 
between action and fabrication, praxis and poiesis, notwithstand- 
ing). In this instance, it is perfectly obvious how this interpre- 
tation, though it may serve to explain psychologically the phe- 
nomenon of ingratitude on the assumption that both benefactor 
and recipient agree about an interpretation of action in terms of 
making, actually spoils the action itself and its true result, the 
relationship it should have established. The example of the legis- 
lator is less plausible for us only because the Greek notion of the 
task and role of the legislator in the public realm is so utterly alien 
to our own. In any event, work, such as the activity of the legisla- 
tor in Greek understanding, can become the content of action only 
on condition that further action is not desirable or possible; and 
action can result in an end product only on condition that its own 
authentic, non-tangible, and always utterly fragile meaning is 
destroyed. 

The original, prephilosophic Greek remedy for this frailty had 
been the foundation of the polis. The polls, as it grew out of and 
remained rooted in the Greek pr e-polis experience and estimate of 
what makes it worthwhile for men to live together (syzeri), 

[ 196 ] 

namely, the “sharing of words and deeds,” had a twofold func- 
tion. First, it was intended to enable men to do permanently, 
albeit under certain restrictions, what otherwise had been possible 
only as an extraordinary and infrequent enterprise for which they 
had to leave their households. The polls was supposed to multiply 
the occasions to win “immortal fame,” that is, to multiply the 
chances for everybody to distinguish himself, to show in deed 
and word who he was in his unique distinctness. One, if not the 
chief, reason for the incredible development of gift and genius in 
Athens, as well as for the hardly less surprising swift decline of 
the city-state, was precisely that from beginning to end its fore- 
most aim was to make the extraordinary an ordinary occurrence 
of everyday life. The second function of the polls, again closely 
connected with the hazards of action as experienced before its 
coming into being, was to offer a remedy for the futility of action 
and speech; for the chances that a deed deserving fame would not 
be forgotten, that it actually would become “immortal,” were not 
very good. Florner was not only a shining example of the poet’s 
political function, and therefore the “educator of all Hellas”; the 
very fact that so great an enterprise as the Trojan War could have 
been forgotten without a poet to immortalize it several hundred 
years later offered only too good an example of what could happen 
to human greatness if it had nothing but poets to rely on for its 
permanence. 

We are not concerned here with the historical causes for the 
rise of the Greek city-state; what the Greeks themselves thought 
of it and its raison d'etre , they have made unmistakably clear. The 
polls - — if we trust the famous words of Pericles in the Funeral 
Oration — gives a guaranty that those who forced every sea and 
land to become the scene of their daring will not remain without 
witness and will need neither Homer nor anyone else who knows 
how to turn words to praise them; without assistance from others, 
those who acted will be able to establish together the everlasting 
remembrance of their good and bad deeds, to inspire admiration in 
the present and in future ages. In other words, men’s life to- 
gether in the form of the polls seemed to assure that the most 

[ 197 ] 

futile of human activities, action and speech, and the least tangible 
and most ephemeral of man-made “products,” the deeds and 
stories which are their outcome, would become imperishable. The 
organization of the polis, physically secured by the wall around 
the city and physiognomically guaranteed by its laws — lest the 
succeeding generations change its identity beyond recognition— 
is a kind of organized remembrance. It assures the mortal actor 
that his passing existence and fleeting greatness will never lack 
the reality that comes from being seen, being heard, and, gener- 
ally, appearing before an audience of fellow men, who outside the 
polis could attend only the short duration of the performance and 
therefore needed Homer and “others of his craft” in order to be 
presented to those who were not there. 

According to this self-interpretation, the political realm rises 
directly out of acting together, the “sharing of words and deeds.” 
Thus action not only has the most intimate relationship to the public 
part of the world common to us all, but is the one activity which 
constitutes it. It is as though the wall of the polls and the bound- 
aries of the law were drawn around an already existing public 
space which, however, without such stabilizing protection could 
not endure, could not survive the moment of action and speech 
itself. Not historically, of course, but speaking metaphorically and 
theoretically, it is as though the men who returned from the 
Trojan War had wished to make permanent the space of action 
which had arisen from their deeds and sufferings, to prevent its 
perishing with their dispersal and return to their isolated home- 
steads. 

The polis, properly speaking, is not the city-state in its physical 
location; it is the organization of the people as it arises out of 
acting and speaking together, and its true space lies between 
people living together for this purpose, no matter where they 
happen to be. “Wherever you go, you will be a polis”: these 
famous words became not merely the watchword of Greek 
colonization, they expressed the conviction that action and speech 
create a space between the participants which can find its proper 
location almost any time and anywhere. It is the space of appear- 
ance in the widest sense of the word, namely, the space where I 
appear to others as others appear to me, where men exist not 

[ 198 ] 

merely like other living or inanimate things but make their appear- 
ance explicitly. 

This space does not always exist, and although all men are 
capable of deed and word, most of them- — like the slave, the for- 
eigner, and the barbarian in antiquity, like the laborer or crafts- 
man prior to the modern age, the jobholder or businessman in our 
world — do not live in it. No man, moreover, can live in it all the 
time. To be deprived of it means to be deprived of reality, which, 
humanly and politically speaking, is the same as appearance. To 
men the reality of the world is guaranteed by the presence of others, 
by its appearing to all; “for what appears to all, this we call 
Being ,” and whatever lacks this appearance comes and passes 
away like a dream, intimately and exclusively our own but without 
reality.


[[[POWER AND THE SPACE OF APPEARANCE]]]

The space of appearance comes into being wherever men are 
together in the manner of speech and action, and therefore pre- 
dates and precedes all formal constitution of the public realm and 
the various forms of government, that is, the various forms in 
which the public realm can be organized. Its peculiarity is that, 
unlike the spaces which are the work of our hands, it does not sur- 
vive the actuality of the movement which brought it into being, 
but disappears not only with the dispersal of men — as in the case 
of great catastrophes when the body politic of a people is de- 
stroyed — but with the disappearance or arrest of the activities 
themselves. Wherever people gather together, it is potentially 
there, but only potentially, not necessarily and not forever. That 
civilizations can rise and fall, that mighty empires and great cul- 
tures can decline and pass away without external catastrophes — 
and more often than not such external “causes” are preceded by a 

[ 199 ] 

less visible internal decay that invites disaster — is due to this 
peculiarity of the public realm, which, because it ultimately re- 
sides on action and speech, never altogether loses its potential 
character. What first undermines and then kills political com- 
munities is loss of power and final impotence; and power cannot 
be stored up and kept in reserve for emergencies, like the instru- 
ments of violence, but exists only in its actualization. Where 
power is not actualized, it passes away, and history is full of ex- 
amples that the greatest material riches cannot compensate for 
this loss. Power is actualized only where word and deed have not 
parted company, where words are not empty and deeds not brutal, 
where words are not used to veil intentions but to disclose reali- 
ties, and deeds are not used to violate and destroy but to establish 
relations and create new realities. 

Power is what keeps the public realm, the potential space of 
appearance between acting and speaking men, in existence. The 
word itself, its Greek equivalent dynamis , like the Latin potentia 
with its various modern dervatives or the German Macht (which 
derives from mogen and moglich , not from macheri), indicates its 
“potential” character. Power is always, as we would say, a power 
potential and not an unchangeable, measurable, and reliable entity 
like force or strength. While strength is the natural quality of an 
individual seen in isolation, power springs up between men when 
they act together and vanishes the moment they disperse. Because 
of this peculiarity, which power shares with all potentialities that 
can only be actualized but never fully materialized, power is to 
an astonishing degree independent of material factors, either of 
numbers or means. A comparatively small but well-organized 
group of men can rule almost indefinitely over large and populous 
empires, and it is not infrequent in history that small and poor 
countries get the better of great and rich nations. (The story of 
David and Goliath is only metaphorically true; the power of a 
few can be greater than the power of many, but in a contest be- 
tween two men not power but strength decides, and cleverness, 
that is, brain power, contributes materially to the outcome on the 
same level as muscular force.) Popular revolt against materially 
strong rulers, on the other hand, may engender an almost irresist- 
ible power even if it foregoes the use of violence in the face of 

[ 200 ] 

materially vastly superior forces. To call this “passive resistance” 
is certainly an ironic idea; it is one of the most active and efficient 
ways of action ever devised, because it cannot be countered by 
fighting, where there may be defeat or victory, but only by mass 
slaughter in which even the victor is defeated, cheated of his prize, 
since nobody can rule over dead men. 

The only indispensable material factor in the generation of 
power is the living together of people. Only where men live so 
close together that the potentialities of action are always present 
can power remain with them, and the foundation of cities, which 
as city-states have remained paradigmatic for all Western political 
organization, is therefore indeed the most important material pre- 
requisite for power. What keeps people together after the fleeting 
moment of action has passed (what we today call “organization”) 
and what, at the same time, they keep alive through remaining to- 
gether is power. And whoever, for whatever reasons, isolates 
himself and does not partake in such being together, forfeits power 
and becomes impotent, no matter how great his strength and how 
valid his reasons. 

If power were more than this potentiality in being together, if 
it could be possessed like strength or applied like force instead of 
being dependent upon the unreliable and only temporary agree- 
ment of many wills and intentions, omnipotence would be a con- 
crete human possibility. For power, like action, is boundless; it 
has no physical limitation in human nature, in the bodily existence 
of man, like strength. Its only limitation is the existence of other 
people, but this limitation is not accidental, because human power 
corresponds to the condition of plurality to begin with. For the 
same reason, power can be divided without decreasing it, and the 
interplay of powers with their checks and balances is even liable 
to generate more power, so long, at least, as the interplay is alive 
and has not resulted in a stalemate. Strength, on the contrary, is 
indivisible, and while it, too, is checked and balanced by the pres- 
ence of others, the interplay of plurality in this case spells a defi- 
nite limitation on the strength of the individual, which is kept in 
bounds and may be overpowered by the power potential of the 
many. An identification of the strength necessary for the produc- 
tion of things with the power necessary for action is conceivable 

[ 201 ] 

only as the divine attribute of one god. Omnipotence therefore is 
never an attribute of gods in polytheism, no matter how superior 
the strength of the gods may be to the forces of men. Conversely, 
aspiration toward omnipotence always implies— apart from its 
utopian hubris — the destruction of plurality. 

Under the conditions of human life, the only alternative to 
power is not strength— which is helpless against power — but 
force, which indeed one man alone can exert against his fellow 
men and of which one or a few can possess a monopoly by acquir- 
ing the means of violence. But while violence can destroy power, 
it can never become a substitute for it. From this results the by 
no means infrequent political combination of force and powerless- 
ness, an array of impotent forces that spend themselves, often 
spectacularly and vehemently but in utter futility, leaving behind 
neither monuments nor stories, hardly enough memory to enter 
into history at all. In historical experience and traditional theory, 
this combination, even if it is not recognized as such, is known as 
tyranny, and the time-honored fear of this form of government is 
not exclusively inspired by its cruelty, which— as the long series 
of benevolent tyrants and enlightened despots attests — is not 
among its inevitable features, but by the impotence and futility 
to which it condemns the rulers as well as the ruled. 

More important is a discovery made, as far as I know, only by 
Montesquieu, the last political thinker to concern himself serious- 
ly with the problem of forms of government. Montesquieu realized 
that the outstanding characteristic of tyranny was that it rested 
on isolation — on the isolation of the tyrant from his subjects and 
the isolation of the subjects from each other through mutual fear 
and suspicion — and hence that tyranny was not one form of gov- 
ernment among others but contradicted the essential human con- 
dition of plurality, the acting and speaking together, which is the 
condition of all forms of political organization. Tyranny prevents 
the development of power, not only in a particular segment of the 
public realm but in its entirety; it generates, in other words, im- 
potence as naturally as other bodies politic generate power. This, 
in Montesquieu’s interpretation, makes it necessary to assign it a 
special position in the theory of political bodies: it alone is unable 
to develop enough power to remain at all in the space of appear- 

[ 202 ] 

ance, the public realm; on the contrary, it develops the germs of 
its own destruction the moment it comes into existence.

Violence, curiously enough, can destroy power more easily 
than it can destroy strength, and while a tyranny is always char- 
acterized by the impotence of its subjects, who have lost their 
human capacity to act and speak together, it is not necessarily 
characterized by weakness and sterility; on the contrary, the 
crafts and arts may flourish under these conditions if the ruler is 
“benevolent” enough to leave his subjects alone in their isolation. 
Strength, on the other hand, nature’s gift to the individual which 
cannot be shared with others, can cope with violence more success- 
fully than with power — either heroically, by consenting to fight 
and die, or stoically, by accepting suffering and challenging all 
affliction through self-sufficiency and withdrawal from the world; 
in either case, the integrity of the individual and his strength re- 
main intact. Strength can actually be ruined only by power and is 
therefore always in danger from the combined force of the many. 
Power corrupts indeed when the weak band together in order to 
ruin the strong, but not before. The will to power, as the modem 
age from Hobbes to Nietzsche understood it in glorification or 
denunciation, far from being a characteristic of the strong, is, like 
envy and greed, among the vices of the weak, and possibly even 
their most dangerous one. 

If tyranny can be described as the always abortive attempt to 
substitute violence for power, ochlocracy, or mob rule, which is 
its exact counterpart, can be characterized by the much more 
promising attempt to substitute power for strength. Power indeed 
can ruin all strength and we know that where the main public 
realm is society, there is always the danger that, through a per- 
verted form of “acting together” — by pull and pressure and the 
tricks of cliques— those are brought to the fore who know nothing 
and can do nothing. The vehement yearning for violence, so char- 

[ 203 ] 

acteristic of some of the best modern creative artists, thinkers, 
scholars, and craftsmen, is a natural reaction of those whom 
society has tried to cheat of their strength.

Power preserves the public realm and the space of appearance, 
and as such it is also the lifeblood of the human artifice, which, 
unless it is the scene of action and speech, of the web of human 
affairs and relationships and the stories engendered by them, lacks 
its ultimate raison d'etre. Without being talked about by men and 
without housing them, the world would not be a human artifice 
but a heap of unrelated things to which each isolated individual 
was at liberty to add one more object; without the human artifice 
to house them, human affairs would be as floating, as futile and 
vain, as the wanderings of nomad tribes. The melancholy wisdom 
of Ecclesiastes — “Vanity of vanities; all is vanity. . . . There is no 
new thing under the sun, . . . there is no remembrance of former 
things; neither shall there be any remembrance of things that are 
to come with those that shall come after”' — does not necessarily 
arise from specifically religious experience; but it is certainly un- 
avoidable wherever and whenever trust in the world as a place fit 
for human appearance, for action and speech, is gone. Without 
action to bring into the play of the world the new beginning of 
which each man is capable by virtue of being born, “there is no 
new thing under the sun”; without speech to materialize and 
memorialize, however tentatively, the “new things” that appear 
and shine forth, “there is no remembrance”; without the enduring 
permanence of a human artifact, there cannot “be any remem- 
brance of things that are to come with those that shall come after.” 
And without power, the space of appearance brought forth through 
action and speech in public will fade away as rapidly as the living 
deed and the living word. 

Perhaps nothing in our history has been so short-lived as trust 
in power, nothing more lasting than the Platonic and Christian 
distrust of the splendor attending its space of appearance, nothing 

[ 204 ] 


— finally in the modern age— more common than the conviction 
that “power corrupts.” The words of Pericles, as Thucydides 
reports them, are perhaps unique in their supreme confidence that 
men can enact and save their greatness at the same time and, as it 
were, by one and the same gesture, and that the performance as 
such will be enough to generate dynamis and not need the trans- 
forming reification of homo faber to keep it in reality. Pericles’ 
speech, though it certainly corresponded to and articulated the 
innermost convictions of the people of Athens, has always been 
read with the sad wisdom of hindsight by men who knew that his 
words were spoken at the beginning of the end. Yet short-lived as 
this faith in dynamis (and consequently in politics) may have been 
— and it had already come to an end when the first political phi- 
losophies were formulated — its bare existence has sufficed to ele- 
vate action to the highest rank in the hierarchy of the vita activa 
and to single out speech as the decisive distinction between human 
and animal life, both of which bestowed upon politics a dignity 
which even today has not altogether disappeared. 

What is outstandingly clear in Pericles’ formulations — and, in- 
cidentally, no less transparent in Homer’s poems — is that the 
innermost meaning of the acted deed and the spoken word is inde- 
pendent of victory and defeat and must remain untouched by any 
eventual outcome, by their consequences for better or worse. 
Unlike human behavior — which the Greeks, like all civilized 
people, judged according to “moral standards,” taking into ac- 
count motives and intentions on the one hand and aims and conse- 
quences on the other— action can be judged only by the criterion 
of greatness because it is in its nature to break through the com- 
monly accepted and reach into the extraordinary, where whatever 
is true in common and everyday life no longer applies because 
everything that exists is unique and sui generis. Thucydides, or 

[ 205 ] 

Pericles, knew full well that he had broken with the normal stand- 
ards for everyday behavior when he found the glory of Athens in 
having left behind “everywhere everlasting remembrance [mne- 
meia aidia ] of their good and their evil deeds.” The art of politics 
teaches men how to bring forth what is great and radiant — ta 
megala kai lampra , in the words of Democritus; as long as the polls 
is there to inspire men to dare the extraordinary, all things are 
safe; if it perishes, everything is lost. Motives and aims, no 
matter how pure or how grandiose, are never unique; like psycho- 
logical qualities, they are typical, characteristic of different types 
of persons. Greatness, therefore, or the specific meaning of each 
deed, can lie only in the performance itself and neither in its 
motivation nor its achievement. 

It is this insistence on the living deed and the spoken word as 
the greatest achievements of which human beings are capable that 
was conceptualized in Aristotle’s notion of energeia (“actuality”), 
with which he designated all activities that do not pursue an end 
(are ateleis) and leave no work behind (no par autas erga ), but 
exhaust their full meaning in the performance itself. It is from the 
experience of this full actuality that the paradoxical “end in itself” 
derives its original meaning; for in thdse instances of action and 
speech the end (telos) is not pursued but lies in the activity itself 
which therefore becomes an entelecheia , and the work is not what 
follows and extinguishes the process but is imbedded in it; the 
performance is the work, is energeia. Aristotle, in his political 
philosophy, is still well aware of what is at stake in politics, name- 
ly, no less than the ergon ton anthropou (the “work of man” qua 

[ 206 ] 

man), and if he defined this “work” as “to live well” (eu zeri), he 
clearly meant that “work” here is no work product but exists only 
in sheer actuality. This specifically human achievement lies alto- 
gether outside the category of means and ends; the “work of man” 
is no end because the means to achieve it — the virtues, or aretai — 
are not qualities which may or may not be actualized, but are 
themselves “actualities.” In other words, the means to achieve the 
end would already be the end; and this “end,” conversely, cannot 
be considered a means in some other respect, because there is 
nothing higher to attain than this actuality itself. 

It is like a feeble echo of the prephilosophical Greek experience 
of action and speech as sheer actuality to read time and again in 
political philosophy since Democritus and Plato that politics is a 
techne, belongs among the arts, and can be likened to such activities 
as healing or navigation, where, as in the performance of the 
dancer or play-actor, the “product” is identical with the perform- 
ing act itself. But we may gauge what has happened to action and 
speech, which are only in actuality, and therefore the highest ac- 
tivities in the political realm, when we hear what modern society, 
with the peculiar and uncompromising consistency that charac- 
terized it in its early stages, had to say about them. For this all- 
important degradation of action and speech is implied when Adam 
Smith classifies all occupations which rest essentially on perform- 
ance — such as the military profession, “churchmen, lawyers, 
physicians and opera-singers” — together with “menial services,” 
the lowest and most unproductive “labour.” It was precisely 
these occupations — healing, flute-playing, play-acting — which 
furnished ancient thinking with examples for the highest and 
greatest activities of man. 


[[[Homo Faber and the space of Appearance]]]

The root of the ancient estimation of politics is the conviction that 
man qua man, each individual in his unique distinctness, appears 
and confirms himself in speech and action, and that these activi- 


[ 207 ] 

ties, despite their material futility, possess an enduring quality of 
their own because they create their own remembrance. The 
public realm, the space within the world which men need in order 
to appear at all, is therefore more specifically “the work of man” 
than is the work of his hands or the labor of his body. 

The conviction that the greatest that man can achieve is his own 
appearance and actualization is by no means a matter of course. 
Against it stands the conviction of homo faber that a man’s products 
may be more— and not only more lasting— than he is himself, as 
well as the animal laborans' firm belief that life is the highest of all 
goods. Both, therefore, are, strictly speaking, unpolitical, and will 
incline to denounce action and speech as idleness, idle busybody- 
ness and idle talk, and generally will judge public activities in 
terms of their usefulness to supposedly higher ends— to make the 
world more useful and more beautiful in the case of homo faber , to 
make life easier and longer in the case of the animal laborans. This, 
however, is not to say that they are free to dispense with a public 
realm altogether, for without a space of appearance and without 
trusting in action and speech as a mode of being together, neither 
the reality of one’s self, of one’s own identity, nor the reality of 
the surrounding world can be established beyond doubt. The 
human sense of reality demands that men actualize the sheer pas- 
sive givenness of their being, not in order to change it but in order 
to make articulate and call into full existence what otherwise they 
would have to suffer passively anyhow. This actualization re- 
sides and comes to pass in those activities that exist only in sheer 
actuality. 

The only character of the world by which to gauge its reality is 
its being common to us all, and common sense occupies such a high 
rank in the hierarchy of political qualities because it is the one 
sense that fits into reality as a whole our five strictly individual 
senses and the strictly particular data they perceive. It is by virtue 

[ 208 ] 

of common sense that the other sense perceptions are known to 
disclose reality and are not merely felt as irritations of our nerves 
or resistance sensations of our bodies. A noticeable decrease in 
common sense in any given community and a noticeable increase 
in superstition and gullibility are therefore almost infallible signs 
of alienation from the world. 

This alienation — the atrophy of the space of appearance and the 
withering of common sense — is, of course, carried to a much 
greater extreme in the case of a laboring society than in the case 
of a society of producers. In his isolation, not only undisturbed by 
others but also not seen and heard and confirmed by them, homo 
faber is together not only with the product he makes but also with 
the world of things to which he will add his own products; in this, 
albeit indirect, way, he is still together with others who made the 
world and who also are fabricators of things. We have already 
mentioned the exchange market on which the craftsmen meet 
their peers and which represents to them a common public realm 
in so far as each of them has contributed something to it. Yet while 
the public realm as exchange market corresponds most adequately to 
the activity of fabrication, exchange itself already belongs in the field 
of action and is by no means a mere prolongation of production; it 
is even less a mere function of automatic processes, as the buying 
of food and other means of consumption is necessarily incidental 
to laboring. Marx’s contention that economic laws are like natural 
laws, that they are not made by man to regulate the free acts of 
exchange but are functions of the productive conditions of society 
as a whole, is correct only in a laboring society, where all activi- 
ties are leveled down to the human body’s metabolism with nature 
and where no exchange exists but only consumption. 

However, the people who meet on the exchange market are 
primarily not persons but producers of products, and what they 
show there is never themselves, not even their skills and qualities 
as in the “conspicuous production” of the Middle Ages, but their 
products. The impulse that drives the fabricator to the public 
market place is the desire for products, not for people, and the 
power that holds this market together and in existence is not the 
potentiality which springs up between people when they come 
together in action and speech, but a combined “power of ex- 

[ 209 ] 

change” (Adam Smith) which each of the participants acquired in 
isolation. It is this lack of relatedness to others and this primary 
concern with exchangeable commodities which Marx denounced 
as the dehumanization and self-alienation of commercial society, 
which indeed excludes men qua men and demands, in striking 
reversal of the ancient relationship between private and public, 
that men show themselves only in the privacy of their families or 
the intimacy of their friends. 

The frustration of the human person inherent in a community of 
producers and even more in commercial society is perhaps best 
illustrated by the phenomenon of genius, in which, from the Ren- 
aissance to the end of the nineteenth century, the modern age saw 
its highest ideal. (Creative genius as the quintessential expression 
of human greatness was quite unknown to antiquity or the Middle 
Ages.) It is only with the beginning of our century that great 
artists in surprising unanimity have protested against being called 
“geniuses” and have insisted on craftmanship, competence, and 
the close relationships between art and handicraft. This protest, 
to be sure, is partly no more than a reaction against the vulgariza- 
tion and commercialization of the notion of genius; but it is also 
due to the more recent rise of a laboring society, for which pro- 
ductivity or creativity is no ideal and which lacks all experiences 
from which the very notion of greatness can spring. What is im- 
portant in our context is that the work of genius, as distinguished 
from the product of the craftsman, appears to have absorbed those 
elements of distinctness and uniqueness which find their immedi- 
ate expression only in action and speech. The modern age’s obses- 
sion with the unique signature of each artist, its unprecedented 
sensitivity to style, shows a preoccupation with those features by 
which the artist transcends his skill and workmanship in a way 
similar to the way each person’s uniqueness transcends the sum 
total of his qualities. Because of this transcendence, which indeed 
distinguishes the great work of art from all other products of hu- 
man hands, the phenomenon of the creative genius seemed like the 
highest legitimation for the conviction of homo faber that a man’s 
products may be more and essentially greater than himself. 

However, the great reverence the modern age so willingly paid 
to genius, so frequently bordering on idolatry, could hardly change 

[ 210 ] 

the elementary fact that the essence of who somebody is cannot 
be reified by himself. When it appears “objectively” — in the style 
of an art work or in ordinary handwriting — it manifests the iden- 
tity of a person and therefore serves to identify authorship, but it 
remains mute itself and escapes us if we try to interpret it as the 
mirror of a living person. In other words, the idolization of genius 
harbors the same degradation of the human person as the other 
tenets prevalent in commercial society. 

It is an indispensable element of human pride to believe that 
who somebody is transcends in greatness and importance any- 
thing he can do and produce. “Let physicians and confectioners 
and the servants of the great houses be judged by what they have 
done, and even by what they have meant to do; the great people 
themselves are judged by what they are .” Only the vulgar will 
condescend to derive their pride from what they have done; they 
will, by this condescension, become the “slaves and prisoners” of 
their own faculties and will find out, should anything more be left 
in them than sheer stupid vanity, that to be one’s own slave and 
prisoner is no less bitter and perhaps even more shameful than to 
be the servant of somebody else. It is not the glory but the pre- 
dicament of the creative genius that in his case the superiority of 
man to his work seems indeed inverted, so that he, the living 
creator, finds himself in competition with his creations which he 
outlives, although they may survive him eventually. The saving 
grace of all really great gifts is that the persons who bear their 
burden remain superior to what they have done, at least as long as 
the source of creativity is alive; for this source springs indeed 
from who they are and remains outside the actual work process 
as well as independent of what they may achieve. That the pre- 
dicament of genius is nevertheless a real one becomes quite ap- 
parent in the case of the literati , where the inverted order between 
man and his product is in fact consummated; what is so outrageous 
in their case, and incidentally incites popular hatred even more 
than spurious intellectual superiority, is that even their worst 
product is likely to be better than they are themselves. It is the 
hallmark of the “intellectual” that he remains quite undisturbed 

[ 211 ] 

by “the terrible humiliation” under which the true artist or writer 
labors, which is “to feel that he becomes the son of his work,” in 
which he is condemned to see himself “as in a mirror, limited, 
such and such .”

[[[THE LABOR MOVEMENT]]]

The activity of work, for which isolation from others is a neces- 
sary prerequisite, although it may not be able to establish an 
autonomous public realm in which men qua men can appear, still 
is connected with this space of appearances in many ways; at the 
very least, it remains related to the tangible world of things it 
produced. Workmanship, therefore, may be an unpolitical way of 
life, but it certainly is not an antipolitical one. Yet this precisely 
is the case of laboring, an activity in which man is neither to- 
gether with the world nor with other people, but alone with his 
body, facing the naked necessity to keep himself alive. To be 
sure, he too lives in the presence of and together with others, but 
this togetherness has none of the distinctive marks of true plurali- 
ty. It does not consist in the purposeful combination of different 
skills and callings as in the case of workmanship (let alone in the 
relationships between unique persons), but exists in the multipli- 
cation of specimens which are fundamentally all alike because 
they are what they are as mere living organisms. 

[ 212 ] 


It is indeed in the nature of laboring to bring men together in 
the form of a labor gang where any number of individuals “labor 
together as though they were one ,” and in this sense togetherness 
may permeate laboring even more intimately than any other 
activity. But this “collective nature of labor,” far from estab- 
lishing a recognizable, identifiable reality for each member of the 
labor gang, requires on the contrary the actual loss of all aware- 
ness of individuality and identity; and it is for this reason that all 
those “values” which derive from laboring, beyond its obvious 
function in the life process, are entirely “social” and essentially 
not different from the additional pleasure derived from eating and 
drinking in company. The sociability arising out of those activi- 
ties which spring from the human body’s metabolism with nature 
rest not on equality but on sameness, and from this viewpoint it 
is perfectly true that “by nature a philosopher is not in genius and 
disposition half so different from a street porter as a mastiff is 
from a greyhound.” This remark of Adam Smith, which Marx 
quoted with great delight, indeed fits a consumers’ society much 

[ 213 ] 

better than the gathering of people on the exchange market, which 
brings to light the skills and qualities of the producers and thus 
always provides some basis for distinction. 

The sameness prevailing in a society resting on labor and con- 
sumption and expressed in its conformity is intimately connected 
with the somatic experience of laboring together, where the bio- 
logical rhythm of labor unites the group of laborers to the point 
that each may feel that he is no longer an individual but actually 
one with all others. To be sure, this eases labor’s toil and trouble 
in much the same way as marching together eases the effort of 
walking for each soldier. It is therefore quite true that for the 
animal laborms “labor’s sense and value depend entirely upon the 
social conditions,” that is, upon the extent to which the labor and 
consumption process is permitted to function smoothly and easily, 
independent of “professional attitudes properly speaking ”; the 
trouble is only that the best “social conditions” are those under 
which it is possible to lose one’s identity. This unitedness of many 
into one is basically antipolitical; it is the very opposite of the 
togetherness prevailing in political or commercial communities, 
which— to take the Aristotelian example — consist not of an asso- 
ciation ( koinonia ) between two physicians, but between a physi- 

[ 214 ] 

cian and a farmer, “and in general between people who are differ- 
ent and unequal.”

The equality attending the public realm is necessarily an equali- 
ty of unequals who stand in need of being “equalized” in certain 
respects and for specific purposes. As such, the equalizing factor 
arises not from human “nature” but from outside, just as money — 
to continue the Aristotelian example — is needed as an outside fac- 
tor to equate the unequal activities of physician and farmer. Politi- 
cal equality, therefore, is the very opposite of our equality before 
death, which as the common fate of all men arises out of the 
human condition, or of equality before God, at least in its Christian 
interpretation, where we are confronted with an equality of sin- 
fulness inherent in human nature. In these instances, no equalizer 
is needed because sameness prevails anyhow; by the same token, 
however, the actual experience of this sameness, the experience of 
life and death, occurs not only in isolation but in utter loneliness, 
where no true communication, let alone association and commu- 
nity, is possible. From the viewpoint of the world and the public 
realm, life and death and everything attesting to sameness are 
non- worldly, antipolitical, truly transcendent experiences. 

The incapacity of the animal laborans for distinction and hence 
for action and speech seems to be confirmed by the striking ab- 
sence of serious slave rebellions in ancient and modern times. 
No less striking, however, is the sudden and frequently extraor- 
dinarily productive role which the labor movements have played 
in modern politics. From the revolutions of 1848 to the Hungarian 
revolution of 1956, the European working class, by virtue of being 
the only organized and hence the leading section of the people, 
has written one of the most glorious and probably the most prom- 
ising chapter of recent history. However, although the line be- 
tween political and economic demands, between political organi- 
zations and trade unions, was blurred enough, the two should not 

[ 215 ] 

be confused. The trade unions, defending and fighting for the 
interests of the working class, are responsible for its eventual 
incorporation into modern society, especially for an extraordinary 
increase in economic security, social prestige, and political power. 
The trade unions were never revolutionary in the sense that they 
desired a transformation of society together with a transformation 
of the political institutions in which this society was represented, 
and the political parties of the working class have been interest 
parties most of the time, in no way different from the parties which 
represented other social classes. A distinction appeared only in 
those rare and yet decisive moments when during the process of a 
revolution it suddenly turned out that these people, if not led by 
official party programs and ideologies, had their own ideas about 
the possibilities of democratic government under modern condi- 
tions. In other words, the dividing line between the two is not a 
matter of extreme social and economic demands but solely of the 
proposition of a new form of government. 

What is so easily overlooked by the modern historian who 
faces the rise of totalitarian systems, especially when he deals 
with developments in the Soviet Union, is that just as the modern 
masses and their leaders succeeded, at least temporarily, in bring- 
ing forth in totalitarianism an authentic, albeit all-destructive, new 
form of government, thus the people’s revolutions, for more than 
a hundred years now, have come forth, albeit never successfully, 
with another new form of government: the system of people’s 
councils to take the place of the Continental party system, which, 
one is tempted to say, was discredited even before it came into 
existence. The historical destinies of the two trends in the work- 

[ 216 ] 

ing class, the trade-union movement and the people’s political as- 
pirations, could not be more at variance: the trade unions, that is, 
the working class in so far as it is but one of the classes of modern 
society, have gone from victory to victory, while at the same time 
the political labor movement has been defeated each time it dared 
to put forth its own demands, as distinguished from party pro- 
grams and economic reforms. If the tragedy of the Hungarian 
revolution achieved nothing more than that it showed the world 
that, all defeats and all appearances notwithstanding, this political 
elan has not yet died, its sacrifices were not in vain. 

This apparently flagrant discrepancy between historical fact — 
the political productivity of the working class — and the phenomenal 
data obtained from an analysis of the laboring activity is likely to 
disappear upon closer inspection of the labor movement’s develop- 
ment and substance. The chief difference between slave labor and 
modern, free labor is not that the laborer possesses personal free- 
dom — freedom of movement, economic activity, and personal in- 
violability — but that he is admitted to the political realm and fully 
emancipated as a citizen. The turning point in the history of labor 
came with the abolition of property qualifications for the right to 
vote. Up to this time the status of free labor had been very similar 
to the status of the constantly increasing emancipated slave popula- 
tion in antiquity; these men were free, being assimilated to the 
status of resident aliens, but not citizens. In contrast to ancient 
slave emancipations, where as a rule the slave ceased to be a laborer 
when he ceased to be a slave, and where, therefore, slavery re- 
mained the social condition of laboring no matter how many slaves 
were emancipated, the modern emancipation of labor was intended 
to elevate the laboring activity itself, and this was achieved long 
before the laborer as a person was granted personal and civil rights. 

However, one of the important side effects of the actual emanci- 

[ 217 ] 

pation of laborers was that a whole new segment of the population 
was more or less suddenly admitted to the public realm, that is, 
appeared in public, and this without at the same time being ad- 
mitted to society, without playing any leading role in the all-impor- 
tant economic activities of this society, and without, therefore, 
being absorbed by the social realm and, as it were, spirited away 
from the public. The decisive role of mere appearance, of distin- 
guishing oneself and being conspicuous in the realm of human 
affairs is perhaps nowhere better illustrated than in the fact that 
laborers, when they entered the scene of history, felt it necessary 
to adopt a costume of their own, the sans-culotte, from which, dur- 
ing the French Revolution, they even derived their name. By this 
costume they won a distinction of their own, and the distinction 
was directed against all others. 

The very pathos of the labor movement in its early stages— and 
it is still in its early stages in all countries where capitalism has not 
reached its full development, in Eastern Europe, for example, but 
also in Italy or Spain and even in France — stemmed from its fight 
against society as a whole. The enormous power potential these 
movements acquired in a relatively short time and often under very 

[ 218 ] 

adverse circumstances sprang from the fact that despite all the talk 
and theory they were the only group on the political scene which 
not only defended its economic interests but fought a full-fledged 
political battle. In other words, when the labor movement ap- 
peared on the public scene, it was the only organization in which 
men acted and spoke qua men — and not qua members of society. 

For this political and revolutionary role of the labor movement, 
which in all probability is nearing its end, it is decisive that the 
economic activity of its members was incidental and that its force 
of attraction was never restricted to the ranks of the working class. 
If for a time it almost looked as if the movement would succeed in 
founding, at least within its own ranks, a new public space with 
new political standards, the spring of these attempts was not la- 
bor — neither the laboring activity itself nor the always utopian re- 
bellion against life’s necessity — but those injustices and hypocrisies 
which have disappeared with the transformation of a class society 
into a mass society and with the substitution of a guaranteed an- 
nual wage for daily or weekly pay. 

The workers today are no longer outside of society; they are its 
members, and they are jobholders like everybody else. The politi- 
cal significance of the labor movement is now the same as that of 
any other pressure group; the time is past when, as for nearly a 
hundred years, it could represent the people as a whole — if we 
understand by le peuple the actual political body, distinguished as 
such from the population as well as from society. (In the Hun- 
garian revolution the workers were in no way distinguished from 
the rest of the people; what from 1848 to 1918 had been almost a 
monopoly of the working class — the notion of a parliamentary sys- 
tem based on councils instead of parties — had now become the unan- 
imous demand of the whole people.) The labor movement, equivocal 
in its content and aims from the beginning, lost this representation 
and hence its political role at once wherever the working class be- 
came an integral part of society, a social and economic power of its 
own as in the most developed economies of the Western world, or 

[ 219 ] 

where it “succeeded” in transforming the whole population into a 
labor society as in Russia and as may happen elsewhere even under 
non-totalitarian conditions. Under circumstances where even the 
exchange market is being abolished, the withering of the public 
realm, so conspicuous throughout the modern age, may well find its 
consummation. 

[[[THE TRADITIONAL SUBSTITUTION OF MAKING FOR ACTING]]]

The modern age, in its early concern with tangible products and 
demonstrable profits or its later obsession with smooth functioning 
and sociability, was not the first to denounce the idle uselessness of 
action and speech in particular and of politics in general. Exasper- 
ation with the threefold frustration of action — the unpredictability 
of its outcome, the irreversibility of the process, and the anonymity 
of its authors — is almost as old as recorded history. It has always 
been a great temptation, for men of action no less than for men of 
thought, to find a substitute for action in the hope that the realm of 
human affairs may escape the haphazardness and moral irresponsi- 
bility inherent in a plurality of agents. The remarkable monotony 
of the proposed solutions throughout our recorded history testifies 
to the elemental simplicity of the matter. Generally speaking, they 
always amount to seeking shelter from action’s calamities in an 
activity where one man, isolated from all others, remains master of 
his doings from beginning to end. This attempt to replace acting 
with making is manifest in the whole body of argument against 
“democracy,” which, the more consistently and better reasoned 
it is, will turn into an argument against the essentials of politics. 

The calamities of action all arise from the human condition of 
plurality, which is the condition sine qua non for that space of ap- 
pearance which is the public realm. Hence the attempt to do away 
with this plurality is always tantamount to the abolition of the pub- 
lic realm itself. The most obvious salvation from the dangers of 

[ 220 ] 

plurality is mon-archy, or one-man-rule, in its many varieties, from 
outright tyranny of one against all to benevolent despotism and to 
those forms of democracy in which the many form a collective 
body so that the people “is many in one” and constitute themselves 
as a “monarch .” Plato’s solution of the philosopher-king, whose 
“wisdom” solves the perplexities of action as though they were 
solvable problems of cognition, is only one — and by no means the 
least tyrannical — variety of one-man rule. The trouble with these 
forms of government is not that they are cruel, which often they 
are not, but rather that they work too well. Tyrants, if they know 
their business, may well be “kindly and mild in everything,” like 
Peisistratus, whose rule even in antiquity was compared to “the 
Golden Age of Cronos ”; their measures may sound very “un- 
tyrannical” and beneficial to modern ears, especially when we hear 
that the only- — albeit unsuccessful — attempt to abolish slavery in 
antiquity was made by Periandros, tyrant of Corinth. But they 
all have in common the banishment of the citizens from the public 
realm and the insistence that they mind their private business while 
only “the ruler should attend to public affairs .” This, to be sure, 

[ 221 ]

was tantamount to furthering private industry and industriousness, 
but the citizens could see in this policy nothing but the attempt to 
deprive them of the time necessary for participation in common 
matters. It is the obvious short-range advantages of tyranny, the 
advantages of stability, security, and productivity, that one should 
beware, if only because they pave the way to an inevitable loss of 
power, even though the actual disaster may occur in a relatively 
distant future. 

Escape from the frailty of human affairs into the solidity of quiet 
and order has in fact so much to recommend it that the greater part 
of political philosophy since Plato could easily be interpreted as 
various attempts to find theoretical foundations and practical ways 
for an escape from politics altogether. The hallmark of all such 
escapes is the concept of rule, that is, the notion that men can law- 
fully and politically live together only when some are entitled to 
command and the others forced to obey. The commonplace notion 
already to be found in Plato and Aristotle that every political com- 
munity consists of those who rule and those who are ruled (on 
which assumption in turn are based the current definitions of forms 
of government — rule by one or monarchy, rule by few or oli- 
garchy, rule by many or democracy) rests on a suspicion of action 
rather than on a contempt for men, and arose from the earnest 
desire to find a substitute for action rather than from any irrespon- 
sible or tyrannical will to power. 

Theoretically, the most brief and most fundamental version of 
the escape from action into rule occurs in the Statesman, where 
Plato opens a gulf between the two modes of action, archein and 
prattein (“beginning” and “achieving”), which according to Greek 
understanding were interconnected. The problem, as Plato saw it, 
was to make sure that the beginner would remain the complete 
master of what he had begun, not needing the help of others to 
carry it through. In the realm of action, this isolated mastership 
can be achieved only if the others are no longer needed to join the 
enterprise of their own accord, with their own motives and aims, 
but are used to execute orders, and if, on the other hand, the be- 
ginner who took the initiative does not permit himself to get in- 
volved in the action itself. To begin ( archein ) and to act (prattein ) 
thus can become two altogether different activities, and the begin- 

[ 222 ] 

ner has become a ruler (an archon in the twofold sense of the word) 
who “does not have to act at all ( prattein ), but rules ( archein ) over 
those who are capable of execution.” Under these circumstances, 
the essence of politics is “to know how to begin and to rule in the 
gravest matters with regard to timeliness and untimeliness”; action 
as such is entirely eliminated and has become the mere “execution 
of orders .” Plato was the first to introduce the division between 
those who know and do not act and those who act and do not know, 
instead of the old articulation of action into beginning and achiev- 
ing, so that knowing what to do and doing it became two alto- 
gether different performances. 

Since Plato himself immediately identified the dividing line be- 
tween thought and action with the gulf which separates the rulers 
from those over whom they rule, it is obvious that the experiences 
on which the Platonic division rests are those of the household, 
where nothing would ever be done if the master did not know what 
to do and did not give orders to the slaves who executed them with- 
out knowing. Here indeed, he who knows does not have to do and 
he who does needs no thought or knowledge. Plato was still quite 
aware that he proposed a revolutionary transformation of the polls 
when he applied to its administration the currently recognized 
maxims for a well-ordered household . (It is a common error to 
interpret Plato as though he wanted to abolish the family and the 
household; he wanted, on the contrary, to extend this type of life 
until one family embraced every citizen. In other words, he wanted 
to eliminate from the household community its private character, 
and it is for this purpose that he recommended the abolition of pri- 
vate property and individual marital status .) According to Greek 
understanding, the relationship between ruling and being ruled, 

[ 225 ] 

between command and obedience, was by definition identical with 
the relationship between master and slaves and therefore precluded 
all possibility of action. Plato’s contention, therefore, that the rules 
of behavior in public matters should be derived from the master- 
slave relationship in a well-ordered household actually meant that 
action should not play any part in human affairs. 

It is obvious that Plato’s scheme offers much greater chances for 
a permanent order in human affairs than the tyrant’s efforts to 
eliminate everybody but himself from the public realm. Although 
each citizen would retain some part in the handling of public af- 
fairs, they would indeed “act” like one man without even the pos- 
sibility of internal dissension, let alone factional strife: through 
rule, “the many become one in every respect” except bodily ap- 
pearance. Historically, the concept of rule, though originating in 
the household and family realm, has played its most decisive part 
in the organization of public matters and is for us invariably con- 
nected with politics. This should not make us overlook the fact 
that for Plato it was a much more general category. He saw in it 
the chief device for ordering and judging human affairs in every 
respect. This is not only evident from his insistence that the city- 
state must be considered to be “man writ large” and from his con- 
struction of a psychological order which actually follows the pub- 
lic order of his utopian city, but is even more manifest in the 
grandiose consistency with which he introduced the principle of 
domination into the intercourse of man with himself. The supreme 
criterion of fitness for ruling others is, in Plato and in the aristocrat- 
ic tradition of the West, the capacity to rule one’s self. Just as the 
philosopher-king commands the city, the soul commands the body 
and reason commands the passions. In Plato himself, the legitimacy 
of this tyranny in everything pertaining to man, his conduct toward 
himself no less than his conduct toward others, is still firmly 
rooted in the equivocal significance of the word archein, which 
means both beginning and ruling; it is decisive for Plato, as he says 
expressly at the end of the Laws, that only the beginning ( arche ) is 
entitled to rule {archein ) . In the tradition of Platonic thought, this 
original, linguistically predetermined identity of ruling and begin- 
ning had the consequence that all beginning was understood as the 

[ 224 ] 

legitimation for rulership, until, finally, the element of beginning 
disappeared altogether from the concept of rulership. With it the 
most elementary and authentic understanding of human freedom 
disappeared from political philosophy. 

The Platonic separation of knowing and doing has remained at 
the root of all theories of domination which are not mere justifica- 
tions of an irreducible and irresponsible will to power. By sheer 
force of conceptualization and philosophical clarification, the Pla- 
tonic identification of knowledge with command and rulership and 
of action with obedience and execution overruled all earlier experi- 
ences and articulations in the political realm and became authorita- 
tive for the whole tradition of political thought, even after the 
roots of experience from which Plato derived his concepts had long 
been forgotten. Apart from the unique Platonic mixture of depth 
and beauty, whose weight was bound to carry his thoughts through 
the centuries, the reason for the longevity of this particular part of 
his work is that he strengthened his substitution of rulership for 
action through an even more plausible interpretation in terms of 
making and fabrication. It is indeed true — and Plato, who had 
taken the key word of his philosophy, the term “idea,” from ex- 
periences in the realm of fabrication, must have been the first to 
notice it — that the division between knowing and doing, so alien to 
the realm of action, whose validity and meaningfulness are de- 
stroyed the moment thought and action part company, is an every- 
day experience in fabrication, whose processes obviously fall into 
two parts : first, perceiving the image or shape ( eidos ) of the prod- 
uct-to-be, and then organizing the means and starting the execu- 
tion. 

The Platonic wish to substitute making for acting in order to 
bestow upon the realm of human affairs the solidity inherent in 
work and fabrication becomes most apparent where it touches the 
very center of his philosophy, the doctrine of ideas. When Plato 
was not concerned with political philosophy (as in the Symposium 
and elsewhere), he describes the ideas as what “shines forth most” 
(ekphanestaton) and therefore as variations of the beautiful. Only in 
the Republic were the ideas transformed into standards, measure- 
ments, and rules of behavior, all of which are variations or deriva- 
tions of the idea of the “good” in the Greek sense of the word, that 

[ 225 ] 


is, of the “good for” or of fitness. This transformation was neces- 
sary to apply the doctrine of ideas to politics, and it is essentially 
for a political purpose, the purpose of eliminating the character of 
frailty from human affairs, that Plato found it necessary to declare 
the good, and not the beautiful, to be the highest idea. But this idea 
of the good is not the highest idea of the philosopher, who wishes 
to contemplate the true essence of Being and therefore leaves the 
dark cave of human affairs for the bright sky of ideas; even in the 
Republic , the philosopher is still defined as a lover of beauty, not of 
goodness. The good is the highest idea of the philosopherTmg, who 
wishes to be the ruler of human affairs because he must spend his 
life among men and cannot dwell forever under the sky of ideas. 
It is only when he returns to the dark cave of human affairs to live 
once more with his fellow men that he needs the ideas for guidance 
as standards and rules by which to measure and under which to 
subsume the varied multitude of human deeds and words with the 
same absolute, “objective” certainty with which the craftsman can 
be guided in making and the layman in judging individual beds by 
using the unwavering ever-present model, the “idea” of bed in 
general. 

Technically, the greatest advantage of this transformation and 
application of the doctrine of ideas to the political realm lay in the 
elimination of the personal element in the Platonic notion of ideal 

[ 226 ] 

rulership. Plato knew quite well that his favorite analogies taken 
from household life, such as the master-slave or the shepherd-flock 
relationship, would demand a quasi-divine quality in the ruler of 
men to distinguish him as sharply from his subjects as the slaves are 
distinguished from the master or the sheep from the shepherd. 
The construction of the public space in the image of a fabricated 
object, on the contrary, carried with it only the implication of or- 
dinary mastership, experience in the art of politics as in all other 
arts, where the compelling factor lies not in the person of the artist 
or craftsman but in the impersonal object of his art or craft. In the 
Republic , the philosopher-king applies the ideas as the craftsman 
applies his rules and standards; he “makes” his City as the sculptor 
makes a statue; and in the final Platonic work these same ideas 
have even become laws which need only be executed.

Within this frame of reference, the emergence of a utopian 
political system which could be construed in accordance with a 
model by somebody who has mastered the techniques of human 
affairs becomes almost a matter of course; Plato, who was the first 
to design a blueprint for the making of political bodies, has re- 
mained the inspiration of all later utopias. And although none of 
these utopias ever came to play any noticeable role in history — for 
in the few instances where utopian schemes were realized, they 
broke down quickly under the weight of reality, not so much the 
reality of exterior circumstances as of the real human relationships 
they could not control — they were among the most efficient ve- 
hicles to conserve and develop a tradition of political thinking in 

[ 227 ] 

which, consciously or unconsciously, the concept of action was 
interpreted in terms of making and fabrication. 

One thing, however, is noteworthy in the development of this 
tradition. It is true that violence, without which no fabrication 
could ever come to pass, has always played an important role in 
political schemes and thinking based upon an interpretation of ac- 
tion in terms of making; but up to the modern age, this element of 
violence remained strictly instrumental, a means that needed an end 
to justify and limit it, so that glorifications of violence as such are 
entirely absent from the tradition of political thought prior to the 
modern age. Generally speaking, they were impossible as long as 
contemplation and reason were supposed to be the highest capaci- 
ties of man, because under this assumption all articulations of the 
vita activa, fabrication no less than action and let alone labor, re- 
mained themselves secondary and instrumental. Within the nar- 
rower sphere of political theory, the consequence was that the 
notion of rule and the concomitant questions of legitimacy and 
rightful authority played a much more decisive role than the under- 
standing and interpretations of action itself. Only the modern age’s 
conviction that man can know only what he makes, that his al- 
legedly higher capacities depend upon making and that he therefore 
is primarily homo faber and not an animal rationale , brought forth 
the much older implications of violence inherent in all interpreta- 
tions of the realm of human affairs as a sphere of making. This has 
been particularly striking in the series of revolutions, characteristic 
of the modern age, all of which — with the exception of the Ameri- 
can Revolution — show the same combination of the old Roman 
enthusiasm for the foundation of a new body politic with the 
glorification of violence as the only means for “making” it. Marx’s 
dictum that “violence is the midwife of every old society pregnant 
with a new one,” that is, of all change in history and politics, only 
sums up the conviction of the whole modern age and draws the 
consequences of its innermost belief that history is “made” by men 
as nature is “made” by God. 

[ 228 ] 

How persistent and successful the transformation of action into 
a mode of making has been is easily attested by the whole ter- 
minology of political theory and political thought, which indeed 
makes it almost impossible to discuss these matters without using 
the category of means and ends and thinking in terms of instrumen- 
tality. Perhaps even more convincing is the unanimity with which 
popular proverbs in all modern languages advise us that “he who 
wants an end must also want the means” and that “you can’t make 
an omelette without breaking eggs.” We are perhaps the first gen- 
eration which has become fully aware of the murderous conse- 
quences inherent in a line of thought that forces one to admit that 
all means, provided that they are efficient, are permissible and jus- 
tified to pursue something defined as an end. However, in order to 
escape these beaten paths of thought it is not enough to add some 
qualifications, such as that not all means are permissible or that 
under certain circumstances means may be more important than 
ends; these qualifications either take for granted a moral system 
which, as the very exhortations demonstrate, can hardly be taken 
for granted, or they are overpowered by the very language and 
analogies they use. For to make a statement about ends that do not 
justify all means is to speak in paradoxes, the definition of an end 
being precisely the justification of the means; and paradoxes al- 
ways indicate perplexities, they do not solve them and hence are 
never convincing. As long as we believe that we deal with ends and 
means in the political realm, we shall not be able to prevent any- 
body’s using all means to pursue recognized ends. 

The substitution of making for acting and the concomitant deg- 
radation of politics into a means to obtain an allegedly “higher” 
end— in antiquity the protection of the good men from the rule of 
the bad in general, and the safety of the philosopher in particular, 
in the Middle Ages the salvation of souls, in the modern age the 
productivity and progress of society — is as old as the tradition of 
political philosophy. It is true that only the modern age defined 
man primarily as homo faber, a toolmaker and producer of things, 


[ 229 ] 

and therefore could overcome the deep-seated contempt and sus- 
picion in which the tradition had held the whole sphere of fabrica- 
tion. Yet, this same tradition, in so far as it also had turned against 
action — less openly, to be sure, but no less effectively — had been 
forced to interpret acting in terms of making, and thereby, its 
suspicion and contempt notwithstanding, had introduced into po- 
litical philosophy certain trends and patterns of thought upon which 
the modern age could fall back. In this respect, the modern age did 
not reverse the tradition but rather liberated it from the “preju- 
dices” which had prevented it from declaring openly that the work 
of the craftsman should rank higher than the “idle” opinions and 
doings which constitute the realm of human affairs. The point is 
that Plato and, to a lesser degree, Aristotle, who thought craftsmen 
not even worthy of full-fledged citizenship, were the first to pro- 
pose handling political matters and ruling political bodies in the 
mode of fabrication. This seeming contradiction clearly indicates 
the depth of the authentic perplexities inherent in the human capac- 
ity for action and the strength of the temptation to eliminate its 
risks and dangers by introducing into the web of human relation- 
ships the much more reliable and solid categories inherent in activi- 
ties with which we confront nature and build the world of the 
human artifice. 

[[[THE PROCESS CHARACTER OF ACTION]]]

The instrumentalization of action and the degradation of politics 
into a means for something else has of course never really suc- 
ceeded in eliminating action, in preventing its being one of the 
decisive human experiences, or in destroying the realm of human 
affairs altogether. We saw before that in our world the seeming 
elimination of labor, as the painful effort to which all human life is 
bound, had first of all the consequence that work is now performed 
in the mode of laboring, and the products of work, objects for use, 
are consumed as though they were mere consumer goods. Simi- 
larly, the attempt to eliminate action because of its uncertainty and 
to save human affairs from their frailty by dealing with them as 
though they were or could become the planned products of human 
making has first of all resulted in channeling the human capacity 

[ 230 ] 

for action, for beginning new and spontaneous processes which 
without men never would come into existence, into an attitude 
toward nature which up to the latest stage of the modern age 
had been one of exploring natural laws and fabricating objects 
out of natural material. To what an extent we have begun to 
act into nature, in the literal sense of the word, is perhaps best il- 
lustrated by a recent, casual remark of a scientist who quite seri- 
ously suggested that “basic research is when I am doing what I 
don’t know what I am doing.” 

This started harmlessly enough with the experiment in which 
men were no longer content to observe, to register, and contem- 
plate whatever nature was willing to yield in her own appearance, 
but began to prescribe conditions and to provoke natural processes. 
What then developed into an ever-increasing skill in unchaining 
elemental processes, which, without the interference of men, 
would have lain dormant and perhaps never have come to pass, has 
finally ended in a veritable art of “making” nature, that is, of 
creating “natural” processes which without men would never 
exist and which earthly nature by herself seems incapable of ac- 
complishing, although similar or identical processes may be com- 
monplace phenomena in the universe surrounding the earth. 
Through the introduction of the experiment, in which we pre- 
scribed man-thought conditions to natural processes and forced 
them to fall into man-made patterns, we eventually learned how to 
“repeat the process that goes on in the sun,” that is, how to win 
from natural processes on the earth those energies which without 
us develop only in the universe. 

The very fact that natural sciences have become exclusively sci- 
ences of process and, in their last stage, sciences of potentially ir- 
reversible, irremediable “processes of no return” is a clear indica- 
tion that, whatever the brain power necessary to start them, the 
actual underlying human capacity which alone could bring about 
this development is no “theoretical” capacity, neither contempla- 
tion nor reason, but the human ability to act — to start new unprece- 
dented processes whose outcome remains uncertain and unpre- 

[ 231 ]

dictable whether they are let loose in the human or the natural 
realm. 

In this aspect of action — all-important to the modern age, to its 
enormous enlargement of human capabilities as well as to its 
unprecedented concept and consciousness of history — processes 
are started whose outcome is unpredictable, so that uncertainty 
rather than frailty becomes the decisive character of human affairs. 
This property of action had escaped the attention of antiquity, by 
and large, and had, to say the least, hardly found adequate articula- 
tion in ancient philosophy, to which the very concept of history as 
we know it is altogether alien. The central concept of the two 
entirely new sciences of the modern age, natural science no less 
than historical, is the concept of process, and the actual human ex- 
perience underlying it is action. Only because we are capable of 
acting, of starting processes of our own, can we conceive of both 
nature and history as systems of processes. It is true that this char- 
acter of modern thinking first came to the fore in the science of 
history, which, since Vico, has been consciously presented as a 
“new science,” while the natural sciences needed several centuries 
before they were forced by the very results of their triumphal 
achievements to exchange an obsolete conceptual framework for a 
vocabulary that is strikingly similar to the one used in the historical 
sciences . 

However that may be, only under certain historical circum- 
stances does frailty appear to be the chief characteristic of human 
affairs. The Greeks measured them against the ever-presence or 
eternal recurrence of all natural things, and the chief Greek con- 
cern was to measure up to and become worthy of an immortality 
which surrounds men but which mortals do not possess. To people 
who are not possessed by this concern with immortality, the realm 
of human affairs is bound to show an altogether different, even 
somehow contradictory aspect, namely, an extraordinary resili- 
ency whose force of persistence and continuity in time is far su- 
perior to the stable durability of the solid world of things. Whereas 
men have always been capable of destroying whatever was the 
product of human hands and have become capable today even of the 
potential destruction of what man did not make— the earth and 
earthly nature — men never have been and never will be able to undo 

[ 232 ] 

or even to control reliably any of the processes they start through 
action. Not even oblivion and confusion, which can cover up so 
efficiently the origin and the responsibility for every single deed, 
are able to undo a deed or prevent its consequences. And this in- 
capacity to undo what has been done is matched by an almost 
equally complete incapacity to foretell the consequences of any 
deed or even to have reliable knowledge of its motives. 

While the strength of the production process is entirely absorbed 
in and exhausted by the end product, the strength of the action 
process is never exhausted in a single deed but, on the contrary, 
can grow while its consequences multiply; what endures in the 
realm of human affairs are these processes, and their endurance is 
as unlimited, as independent of the perishability of material and the 
mortality of men as the endurance of humanity itself. The reason 
why we are never able to foretell with certainty the outcome and 
end of any action is simply that action has no end. The process of a 
single deed can quite literally endure throughout time until man- 
kind itself has come to an end. 

That deeds possess such an enormous capacity for endurance, 
superior to every other man-made product, could be a matter of 
pride if men were able to bear its burden, the burden of irreversi- 
bility and unpredictability, from which the action process draws 
its very strength. That this is impossible, men have always known. 
They have known that he who acts never quite knows what he is 
doing, that he always becomes “guilty” of consequences he never 
intended or even foresaw, that no matter how disastrous and unex- 
pected the consequences of his deed he can never undo it, that the 
process he starts is never consummated unequivocally in one single 
deed or event, and that its very meaning never discloses itself to 
the actor but only to the backward glance of the historian who 
himself does not act. All this is reason enough to turn away with 
despair from the realm of human affairs and to hold in contempt 
the human capacity for freedom, which, by producing the web of 
human relationships, seems to entangle its producer to such an ex- 

[ 255 ]

tent that he appears much more the victim and the sufferer than the 
author and doer of what he has done. Nowhere, in other words, 
neither in labor, subject to the necessity of life, nor in fabrication, 
dependent upon given material, does man appear to be less free 
than in those capacities whose very essence is freedom and in that 
realm which owes its existence to nobody and nothing but man. 

It is in accordance with the great tradition of Western thought to 
think along these lines : to accuse freedom of luring man into neces- 
sity, to condemn action, the spontaneous beginning of something 
new, because its results fall into a predetermined net of relation- 
ships, invariably dragging the agent with them, who seems to for- 
feit his freedom the very moment he makes use of it. The only 
salvation from this kind of freedom seems to lie in non-acting, in 
abstention from the whole realm of human affairs as the only 
means to safeguard one’s sovereignty and integrity as a person. If 
we leave aside the disastrous consequences of these recommenda- 
tions (which materialized into a consistent system of human be- 
havior only in Stoicism), their basic error seems to lie in that 
identification of sovereignty with freedom which has always been 
taken for granted by political as well as philosophic thought. If it 
were true that sovereignty and freedom are the same, then indeed 
no man could be free, because sovereignty, the ideal of uncom- 
promising self-sufficiency and mastership, is contradictory to the 
very condition of plurality. No man can be sovereign because not 
one man, but men, inhabit the earth — and not, as the tradition since 
Plato holds, because of man’s limited strength, which makes him 
depend upon the help of others. All the recommendations the tradi- 
tion has to offer to overcome the condition of non-sovereignty and 
win an untouchable integrity of the human person amount to a 
compensation for the intrinsic “weakness” of plurality. Yet, if 
these recommendations were followed and this attempt to over- 
come the consequences of plurality were successful, the result 
would be not so much sovereign domination of one’s self as ar- 
bitrary domination of all others, or, as in Stoicism, the exchange of 
the real world for an imaginary one where these others would 
simply not exist. 

In other words, the issue here is not strength or weakness in the 
sense of self-sufficiency. In polytheist systems, for instance, even a 

[ 234 ] 

god, no matter how powerful, cannot be sovereign; only under the 
assumption of one god (“One is one and all alone and evermore 
shall be so”) can sovereignty and freedom be the same. Under all 
other circumstances, sovereignty is possible only in imagination, 
paid for by the price of reality. Just as Epicureanism rests on the 
illusion of happiness when one is roasted alive in the Phaleric Bull, 
Stoicism rests on the illusion of freedom when one is enslaved. 
Both illusions testify to the psychological power of imagination, 
but this power can exert itself only as long as the reality of the 
world and the living, where one is and appears to be either happy or 
unhappy, either free or slave, are eliminated to such an extent that 
they are not even admitted as spectators to the spectacle of self- 
delusion. 

If we look upon freedom with the eyes of the tradition, identi- 
fying freedom with sovereignty, the simultaneous presence of free- 
dom and non-sovereignty, of being able to begin something new 
and of not being able to control or even foretell its consequences, 
seems almost to force us to the conclusion that human existence is 
absurd. In view of human reality and its phenomenal evidence, it 
is indeed as spurious to deny human freedom to act because the 
actor never remains the master of his acts as it is to maintain that 
human sovereignty is possible because of the incontestable fact of 
human freedom. 'I he question which then arises is whether our 
notion that freedom and non- sovereignty are mutually exclusive is 

[ 25J ] 

not defeated by reality, or to put it another way, whether the 
capacity for action does not harbor within itself certain potentiali- 
ties which enable it to survive the disabilities of non-sovereignty. 

[[[IRREVERSIBILITY AND THE POWER TO FORGIVE]]]

We have seen that the animal laborans could be redeemed from its 
predicament of imprisonment in the ever-recurring cycle of the 
life process, of being forever subject to the necessity of labor and 
consumption, only through the mobilization of another human ca- 
pacity, the capacity for making, fabricating, and producing of homo 
faber, who as a toolmaker not only eases the pain and trouble of 
laboring but also erects a world of durability. The redemption of 
life, which is sustained by labor, is worldliness, which is sustained 
by fabrication. We saw furthermore that homo faber could be re- 
deemed from his predicament of meaninglessness, the “devaluation 
of all values,” and the impossibility of finding valid standards in a 
world determined by the category of means and ends, only through 
the interrelated faculties of action and speech, which produce 
meaningful stories as naturally as fabrication produces use objects. 
If it were not outside the scope of these considerations, one could 
add the predicament of thought to these instances; for thought, too, 
is unable to “think itself” out of the predicaments which the very 
activity of thinking engenders. What in each of these instances 
saves man— man qua animal laborans , qua homo faber, qua thinker — 
is something altogether different; it comes from the outside — not, 
to be sure, outside of man, but outside of each of the respective 
activities. From the viewpoint of the animal laborans , it is like a 
miracle that it is also a being which knows of and inhabits a world; 
from the viewpoint of ho'/no faber , it is like a miracle, like the 
revelation of divinity, that meaning should have a place in this 
world. 

The case of action and action’s predicaments is altogether dif- 
ferent. Here, the remedy against the irreversibility and unpre- 
dictability of the process started by acting does not arise out of 
another and possibly higher faculty, but is one of the potentialities 

[ 236 ] 

of action itself. The possible redemption from the predicament of 
irreversibility — of being unable to undo what one has done though 
one did not, and could not, have known what he was doing — is 
the faculty of forgiving. The remedy for unpredictability, for the 
chaotic uncertainty of the future, is contained in the faculty to 
make and keep promises. The two faculties belong together in so 
far as one of them, forgiving, serves to undo the deeds of the past, 
whose “sins” hang like Damocles’ sword over every new genera- 
tion; and the other, binding oneself through promises, serves to 
set up in the ocean of uncertainty, which the future is by definition, 
islands of security without which not even continuity, let alone 
durability of any kind, would be possible in the relationships be- 
tween men. 

Without being forgiven, released from the consequences of what 
we have done, our capacity to act would, as it were, be confined to 
one single deed from which we could never recover; we would 
remain the victims of its consequences forever, not unlike the 
sorcerer’s apprentice who lacked the magic formula to break the 
spell. Without being bound to the fulfilment of promises, we would 
never be able to keep our identities; we would be condemned to 
wander helplessly and without direction in the darkness of each 
man’s lonely heart, caught in its contradictions and equivocalities 

a darkness which only the light shed over the public realm 
through the presence of others, who confirm the identity between 
the one who promises and the one who fulfils, can dispel. Both 
faculties, therefore, depend on plurality, on the presence and acting 
of others, for no one can forgive himself and no one can feei bound 
by a promise made only to himself; forgiving and promising en- 
acted in solitude or isolation remain without reality and can signify 
no more than a role played before one’s self. 

Since these faculties correspond so closely to the human condi- 
tion of plurality, their role in politics establishes a diametrically 
different set of guiding principles from the “moral” standards in- 
herent in the Platonic notion of rule. For Platonic rulership, whose 
legitimacy rested upon the domination of the self, draws its guiding 
principles — those which at the same time justify and limit power 
over others — from a relationship established between me and my- 
self, so that the right and wrong of relationships with others are 

[ 237 ] 

determined by attitudes toward one’s self, until the whole of the 
public realm is seen in the image of “man writ large,” of the right 
order between man’s individual capacities of mind, soul, and body. 
The moral code, on the other hand, inferred from the faculties of 
forgiving and of.making promises, rests on experiences which no- 
body could ever have with himself, which, on the contrary, are 
entirely based on the presence of others. And just as the extent and 
modes of self-rule justify and determine rule over others — how one 
rules himself, he will rule others— thus the extent and modes of 
being forgiven and being promised determine the extent and modes 
in which one may be able to forgive himself or keep promises 
concerned only with himself. 

Because the remedies against the enormous strength and resili- 
ency inherent in action processes can function only under the con- 
dition of plurality, it is very dangerous to use this faculty in any 
but the realm of human affairs. Modern natural science and tech- 
nology, which no longer observe or take material from or imitate 
processes of nature but seem actually to act into it, seem, by the 
same token, to have carried irreversibility and human unpredicta- 
bility into the natural realm, where no remedy can be found to 
undo what has been done. Similarly, it seems that one of the great 
dangers of acting in the mode of making and within its categorical 
framework of means and ends lies in the concomitant self-depriva- 
tion of the remedies inherent only in action, so that one is bound 
not only to do with the means of violence necessary for all fabrica- 
tion, but also to undo what he has done as he undoes an unsuccessful 
object, by means of destruction. Nothing appears more manifest in 
these attempts than the greatness of human power, whose source 
lies in the capacity to act, and which without action’s inherent 
remedies inevitably begins to overpower and destroy not man 
himself but the conditions under which life was given to him. 

The discoverer of the role of forgiveness in the realm of human 
affairs was Jesus of Nazareth. The fact that he made this discovery 
in a religious context and articulated it in religious language is no 
reason to take it any less seriously in a strictly secular sense. It has 
been in the nature of our tradition of political thought (and for 
reasons we cannot explore here) to be highly selective and to ex- 
clude from articulate conceptualization a great variety of authentic 

[ 238 ]

political experiences, among which we need not be surprised to 
find some of an even elementary nature. Certain aspects of the 
teaching of Jesus of Nazareth which are not primarily related to 
the Christian religious message but sprang from experiences in the 
small and closely knit community of his followers, bent on chal- 
lenging the public authorities in Israel, certainly belong among 
them, even though they have been neglected because of their al- 
legedly exclusively religious nature. The only rudimentary sign of 
an awareness that forgiveness may be the necessary corrective for 
the inevitable damages resulting from action may be seen in the 
Roman principle to spare the vanquished (par cere subiectis ) — a wis- 
dom entirely unknown to the Greeks — or in the right to commute 
the death sentence, probably also of Roman origin, which is the 
prerogative of nearly all Western heads of state. 

It is decisive in our context that Jesus maintains against the 
“scribes and pharisees” first that it is not true that only God has 
the power to forgive, and second that this power does not derive 
from God — as though God, not men, would forgive through the 
medium of human beings — but on the contrary must be mobilized 
by men toward each other before they can hope to be forgiven by 
God also. Jesus’ formulation is even more radical. Man in the 
gospel is not supposed to forgive because God forgives and he 
must do “likewise,” but “if ye from your hearts forgive,” God 
shall do “likewise .” The reason for the insistence on a duty to 
forgive is clearly “for they know not what they do” and it does 
not apply to the extremity of crime and willed evil, for then it 
would not have been necessary to teach: “And if he trespass 

[ 239 ] 

against thee seven times a day, and seven times in a day turn again 
to thee, saying, I repent; thou shalt forgive him .” Crime and 
willed evil are rare, even rarer perhaps than good deeds; according 
to Jesus, they will be taken care of by God in the Last Judgment, 
which plays no role whatsoever in life on earth, and the Last Judg- 
ment is not characterized by forgiveness but by just retribution 
(apodounai). But trespassing is an everyday occurrence which is in 
the very nature of action’s constant establishment of new relation- 
ships within a web of relations, and it needs forgiving, dismissing, 
in order to make it possible for life to go on by constantly releasing 
men from what they have done unknowingly. Only through this 
constant mutual release from what they do can men remain free 
agents, only by constant willingness to change their minds and 
start again can they be trusted with so great a power as that to 
begin something new. 

In this respect, forgiveness is the exact opposite of vengeance, 
which acts in the form of re-acting against an original trespassing, 
whereby far from putting an end to the consequences of the first 
misdeed, everybody remains bound to the process, permitting the 
chain reaction contained in every action to take its unhindered 

[ 240 ] 

course. In contrast to revenge, which is the natural, automatic re- 
action to transgression and which because of the irreversibility of 
the action process can be expected and even calculated, the act of 
forgiving can never be predicted; it is the only reaction that acts in 
an unexpected way and thus retains, though being a reaction, some- 
thing of the original character of action. Forgiving, in other words, 
is the only reaction which does not merely re-act but acts anew and 
unexpectedly, unconditioned by the act which provoked it and 
therefore freeing from its consequences both the one who forgives 
and the one who is forgiven. The freedom contained in Jesus’ teach- 
ings of forgiveness is the freedom from vengeance, which incloses 
both doer and sufferer in the relentless automatism of the action 
process, which by itself need never come to an end. 

The alternative to forgiveness, but by no means its opposite, is 
punishment, and both have in common that they attempt to put an 
end to something that without interference could go on endlessly. 
It is therefore quite significant, a structural element in the realm of 
human affairs, that men are unable to forgive what they cannot 
punish and that they are unable to punish what has turned out to be 
unforgivable. This is the true hallmark of those offenses which, 
since Kant, we call “radical evil” and about whose nature so little 
is known, even to us who have been exposed to one of their rare 
outbursts on the public scene. All we know is that we can neither 
punish nor forgive such offenses and that they therefore transcend 
the realm of human affairs and the potentialities of human power, 
both of which they radically destroy wherever they make their 
appearance. Here, where the deed itself dispossesses us of all 
power, we can indeed only repeat with Jesus: “It were better for 
him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and he cast into 
the sea.” 

Perhaps the most plausible argument that forgiving and acting 
are as closely connected as destroying and making comes from that 
aspect of forgiveness where the undoing of what was done seems 
to show the same revelatory character as the deed itself. Forgiving 
and the relationship it establishes is always an eminently personal 
(though not necessarily individual or private) affair in which what 
was done is forgiven for the sake of who did it. This, too, was 
clearly recognized by Jesus (“Her sins which are many are for- 

[ 241 ] 

given; for she loved much: but to whom little is forgiven, the 
same loveth little”), and it is the reason for the current conviction 
that only love has the power to forgive. For love, although it is one 
of the rarest occurrences in human lives , indeed possesses an 
unequaled power of self-revelation and an unequaled clarity of 
vision for the disclosure of who, precisely because it is uncon- 
cerned to the point of total unworldliness with what the loved per- 
son may be, with his qualities and shortcomings no less than with 
his achievements, failings, and transgressions. Love, by reason of 
its passion, destroys the in-between which relates us to and sepa- 
rates us from others. As long as its spell lasts, the only in-between 
which can insert itself between two lovers is the child, love’s own 
product. The child, this in-between to which the lovers now are 
related and which they hold in common, is representative of the 
world in that it also separates them; it is an indication that they 
will insert a new world into the existing world. Through the 
child, it is as though the lovers return to the world from which 
their love had expelled them. But this new worldliness, the pos- 
sible result and the only possibly happy ending of a love affair, is, 
in a sense, the end of love, which must either overcome the partners 
anew or be transformed into another mode of belonging together. 
Love, by its very nature, is unworldly, and it is for this reason 
rather than its rarity that it is not only apolitical but antipolitical, 
perhaps the most powerful of all antipolitical human forces. 

If it were true, therefore, as Chrsitianity assumed, that only love 
can forgive because only love is fully receptive to who somebody 

[ 242 ] 

is, to the point of being always willing to forgive him whatever he 
may have done, forgiving would have to remain altogether outside 
our considerations. Yet what love is in its own, narrowly circum- 
scribed sphere, respect is in the larger domain of human affairs. 
Respect, not unlike the Aristotelian philia politike, is a kind of 
“friendship” without intimacy and without closeness; it is a regard 
for the person from the distance which the space of the world puts 
between us, and this regard is independent of qualities which we 
may admire or of achievements which we may highly esteem. 
Thus, the modern loss of respect, or rather the conviction that re- 
spect is due only where we admire or esteem, constitutes a clear 
symptom of the increasing depersonalization of public and social 
life. Respect, at any rate, because it concerns only the person, is 
quite sufficient to prompt forgiving of what a person did, for the 
sake of the person. But the fact that the same who, revealed in 
action and speech, remains also the subject of forgiving is the deep- 
est reason why nobody can forgive himself; here, as in action and 
speech generally, we are dependent upon others, to whom we ap- 
pear in a distinctness which we ourselves are unable to perceive. 
Closed within ourselves, we would never be able to forgive our- 
selves any failing or transgression because we would lack the ex- 
perience of the person for the sake of whom one can forgive. 


[[[UNPREDICTABILITY AND THE POWER OF PROMISE]]]

In contrast to forgiving, which— perhaps because of its religious 
context, perhaps because of the connection with love attending its 
discovery — has always been deemed unrealistic and inadmissible 
in the public realm, the power of stabilization inherent in the fac- 
ulty of making promises has been known throughout our tradition. 
We may trace it back to the Roman legal system, the inviolability 
of agreements and treaties (pacta sunt servanda ) ; or we may see its 
discoverer in Abraham, the man from Ur, whose whole story, as 
the Bible tells it, shows such a passionate drive toward making 
covenants that it is as though he departed from his country for no 
other reason than to try out the power of mutual promise in the 

[ 243 ] 

wilderness of the world, until eventually God himself agreed to 
make a Covenant with him. At any rate, the great variety of con- 
tract theories since the Romans attests to the fact that the power of 
making promises has occupied the center of political thought over 
the centuries. 

The unpredictability which the act of making promises at least 
partially dispels is of a twofold nature: it arises simultaneously out 
of the “darkness of the human heart,” that is, the basic unreliability 
of men who never can guarantee today who they will be tomorrow, 
and out of the impossibility of foretelling the consequences of an 
act within a community of equals where everybody has the same 
capacity to act. Man’s inability to rely upon himself or to have 
complete faith in himself (which is the same thing) is the price 
human beings pay for freedom; and the impossibility of remaining 
unique masters of what they do, of knowing its consequences and 
relying upon the future, is the price they pay for plurality and 
reality, for the joy of inhabiting together with others a world 
whose reality is guaranteed for each by the presence of all. 

The function of the faculty of promising is to master this two- 
fold darkness of human affairs and is, as such, the only alternative 
to a mastery which relies on domination of one’s self and rule over 
others; it corresponds exactly to the existence of a freedom which 
was given under the condition of non-sovereignty. The danger and 
the advantage inherent in all bodies politic that rely on contracts 
and treaties is that they, unlike those that rely on rule and sov- 
ereignty, leave the unpredictability of human affairs and the unre- 
liability of men as they are, using them merely as the medium, as 
it were, into which certain islands of predictability are thrown and 
in which certain guideposts of reliability are erected. The moment 
promises lose their character as isolated islands of certainty in an 
ocean of uncertainty, that is, when this faculty is misused to cover 
the whole ground of the future and to map out a path secured in all 
directions, they lose their binding power and the whole enterprise 
becomes self-defeating. 

We mentioned before the power generated when people gather 
together and “act in concert,” which disappears the moment they 
depart. The force that keeps them together, as distinguished from 
the space of appearances in which they gather and the power which 

[ 244 ] 

keeps this public space in existence, is the force of mutual promise 
or contract. Sovereignty, which is always spurious if claimed by an 
isolated single entity, be it the individual entity of the person or the 
collective entity of a nation, assumes, in the case of many men 
mutually bound by promises, a certain limited reality. The sov- 
ereignty resides in the resulting, limited independence from the 
incalculability of the future, and its limits are the same as those 
inherent in the faculty itself of making and keeping promises. The 
sovereignty of a body of people bound and kept together, not by an 
identical will which somehow magically inspires them all, but by 
an agreed purpose for which alone the promises are valid and bind- 
ing, shows itself quite clearly in its unquestioned superiority over 
those who are completely free, unbound by any promises and 
unkept by any purpose. This superiority derives from the capacity 
to dispose of the future as though it were the present, that is, the 
enormous and truly miraculous enlargement of the very dimension 
in which power can be effective. Nietzsche, in his extraordinary 
sensibility to moral phenomena, and despite his modern prejudice 
to see the source of all power in the will power of the isolated indi- 
vidual, saw in the faculty of promises (the “memory of the will,” as 
he called it) the very distinction which marks off human from ani- 
mal life. If sovereignty is in the realm of action and human affairs 
what mastership is in the realm of making and the world of things, 
then their chief distinction is that the one can only be achieved by 
the many bound together, whereas the other is conceivable only in 
isolation. 

In so far as morality is more than the sum total of mores , of cus- 
toms and standards of behavior solidified through tradition and 
valid on the ground of agreements, both of which change with 
time, it has, at least politically, no more to support itself than the 
good will to counter the enormous risks of action by readiness to 
forgive and to be forgiven, to make promises and to keep them. 

[ 245 ] 

These moral precepts are the only ones that are not applied to ac- 
tion from the outside, from some supposedly higher faculty or from 
experiences outside action’s own reach. They arise, on the con- 
trary, directly out of the will to live together with others in the 
mode of acting and speaking, and thus they are like control mecha- 
nisms built into the very faculty to start new and unending proc- 
esses. If without action and speech, without the articulation of 
natality, we would be doomed to swing forever in the ever-recur- 
ring cycle of becoming, then without the faculty to undo what we 
have done and to control at least partially the processes we have 
let loose, we would be the victims of an automatic necessity bear- 
ing all the marks of the inexorable laws which, according to the 
natural sciences before our time, were supposed to constitute the 
outstanding characteristic of natural processes. We have seen be- 
fore that to mortal beings this natural fatality, though it swings in 
itself and may be eternal, can only spell doom. If it were true that 
fatality is the inalienable mark of historical processes, then it 
would indeed be equally true that everything done in history is 
doomed. 

And to a certain extent this is true. If left to themselves, human 
affairs can only follow the law of mortality, which is the most cer- 
tain and the only reliable law of a life spent between birth and 
death. It is the faculty of action that interferes with this law be- 
cause it interrupts the inexorable automatic course of daily life, 
which in its turn, as we saw, interrupted and interfered with the 
cycle of the biological life process. The life span of man running 
toward death would inevitably carry everything human to ruin and 
destruction if it were not for the faculty of interrupting it and be- 
ginning something new, a faculty which is inherent in action like an 
ever-present reminder that men, though they must die, are not born 
in order to die but in order to begin. Yet just as, from the stand- 
point of nature, the rectilinear movement of man’s life-span be- 
tween birth and death looks like a peculiar deviation from the com- 
mon natural rule of cyclical movement, thus action, seen from the 
viewpoint of the automatic processes which seem to determine the 
course of the world, looks like a miracle. In the language of natural 
science, it is the “infinite improbability which occurs regularly.” 
Action is, in fact, the one miracle-working faculty of man, as Jesus 

[ 246 ]

of Nazareth, whose insights into this faculty can be compared in 
their originality and unprecedentedness with Socrates’ insights into 
the possibilities of thought, must have known very well when he 
likened the power to forgive to the more general power of per- 
forming miracles, putting both on the same level and within the 
reach of man. 

The miracle that saves the world, the realm of human affairs, 
from its normal, “natural” ruin is ultimately the tact of natality, in 
which the faculty of action is ontologically rooted. It is, in other 
words, the birth of new men and the new beginning, the action they 
are capable of by virtue of being born. Only the full experience of 
this capacity can bestow upon human affairs faith and hope, those 
two essential characteristics of human existence which Greek 
antiquity ignored altogether, discounting the keeping of faith as a 
very uncommon and not too important virtue and counting hope 
among the evils of illusion in Pandora’s box. It is this faith in and 
hope for the world that found perhaps its most glorious and most 
succinct expression in the few words with which the Gospels 
announced their “glad tidings”: “A child has been born unto us.” 

[ 247 ] 

[[CHAPTER VI: The Vita Activa and the Modern Age]] 

[[[WORLD ALIENATION]]]

Three great events stand at the threshold of the modern age and 
determine its character : the discovery of America and the ensuing 
exploration of the whole earth; the Reformation, which by ex- 
propriating ecclesiastical and monastic possessions started the two- 
fold process of individual expropriation and the accumulation of 
social wealth; the invention of the telescope and the development 
of a new science that considers the nature of the earth from the 
viewpoint of the universe. These cannot be called modern events 
as we know them since the French Revolution, and although they 
cannot be explained by any chain of causality, because no event 
can, they are still happening in an unbroken continuity, in which 
precedents exist and predecessors can be named. None of them 
exhibits the peculiar character of an explosion of undercurrents 
which, having gathered their force in the dark, suddenly erupt. 
The names we connect with them, Galileo Galilei and Martin 
Luther and the great seafarers, explorers, and adventurers in the 
age of discovery, still belong to a premodern world. Moreover, the 
strange pathos of novelty, the almost violent insistence of nearly 

[ 248 ] 

all the great authors, scientists, and philosophers since the seven- 
teenth century that they saw things never seen before, thought 
thoughts never thought before, can be found in none of them, not 
even in Galileo. These precursors are not revolutionists, and their 
motives and intentions are still securely rooted in tradition. 

In the eyes of their contemporaries, the most spectacular of 
these events must have been the discoveries of unheard-of con- 
tinents and undreamed-of oceans; the most disturbing might have 
been the Reformation’s irremediable split of Western Christianity, 
with its inherent challenge to orthodoxy as such and its immediate 
threat to the tranquillity of men’s souls; certainly the least noticed 
was the addition of a new implement to man’s already large arsenal 
of tools, useless except to look at the stars, even though it was the 
first purely scientific instrument ever devised. However, if we 
could measure the momentum of history as we measure natural 
processes, we might find that what originally had the least notice- 
able impact, man’s first tentative steps toward the discovery of the 
universe, has constantly increased in momentousness as well as 

[ 249 ] 


speed until it has eclipsed not only the enlargement of the earth’s 
surface, which found its final limitation only in the limitations of 
the globe itself, but also the still apparently limitless economic 
accumulation process. 

But these are mere speculations. As a matter of fact, the dis- 
covery of the earth, the mapping of her lands and the chartering of 
her waters, took many centuries and has only now begun to come 
to an end. Only now has man taken full possession of his mortal 
dwelling place and gathered the infinite horizons, which were 
temptingly and forbiddingly open to all previous ages, into a globe 
whose majestic outlines and detailed surface he knows as he knows 
the lines in the palm of his hand. Precisely when the immensity of 
available space on earth was discovered, the famous shrinkage of 
the globe began, until eventually in our world (which, though the 
result of the modern age, is by no means identical with the modern 
age’s world) each man is as much an inhabitant of the earth as he is 
an inhabitant of his country. Men now live in an earth-wide con- 
tinuous whole where even the notion of distance, still inherent in 
the most perfectly unbroken contiguity of parts, has yielded before 
the onslaught of speed. Speed has conquered space; and though this 
conquering process finds its limit at the unconquerable boundary of 
the simultaneous presence of one body at two different places, it 
has made distance meaningless, for no significant part of a human 
life — years, months, or even weeks-~is any longer necessary to 
reach any point on the earth. 

Nothing, to be sure, could have been more alien to the purpose of 
the explorers and circumnavigators of the early modern age than 
this closing-in process; they went to enlarge the earth, not shrink 
her into a ball, and when they submitted to the call of the distant, 
they had no intention of abolishing distance. Only the wisdom of 
hindsight sees the obvious, that nothing can remain immense if it 
can be measured, that every survey brings together distant parts 
and therefore establishes closeness where distance ruled before. 
Thus the maps and navigation charts of the early stages of the 
modern age anticipated the technical inventions through which all 
earthly space has become small and close at hand. Prior to the 
shrinkage of space and the abolition of distance through railroads, 
steamships, and airplanes, there is the infinitely greater and more 

[ 250 ] 

effective shrinkage which comes about through the surveying ca- 
pacity of the human mind, whose use of numbers, symbols, and 
models can condense and scale earthly physical distance down to 
the size of the human body’s natural sense and understanding. 
Before we knew how to circle the earth, how to circumscribe the 
sphere of human habitation in days and hours, we had brought the 
globe into our living rooms to be touched by our hands and swirled 
before our eyes. 

There is another aspect of this matter which, as we shall see, 
will be of greater importance in our context. It is in the nature of 
the human surveying capacity that it can function only if man dis- 
entangles himself from all involvement in and concern with the 
close at hand and withdraws himself to a distance from everything 
near him. The greater the distance between himself and his sur- 
roundings, world or earth, the more he will be able to survey and 
to measure and the less will worldly, earth-bound space be left to 
him. The fact that the decisive shrinkage of the earth was the con- 
sequence of the invention of the airplane, that is, of leaving the 
surface of the earth altogether, is like a symbol for the general 
phenomenon that any decrease of terrestrial distance can be won 
only at the price of putting a decisive distance between man and 
earth, of alienating man from his immediate earthly surroundings. 

The fact that the Reformation, an altogether different event, 
eventually confronts us with a similar phenomenon of alienation, 
which Max Weber even identified, under the name of “innerworldly 
asceticism,” as the innermost spring of the new capitalist mental- 
ity, may be one of the many coincidences that make it so difficult 
for the historian not to believe in ghosts, demons, and Zeitgeists. 
What is so striking and disturbing is the similarity in utmost di- 
vergence. For this innerworldly alienation has nothing to do, either 
in intent or content, with the alienation from the earth inherent in 
the discovery and taking possession of the earth. Moreover, the 
innerworldly alienation whose historical factuality Max Weber 
demonstrated in his famous essay is not only present in the new 
morality that grew out of Luther’s and Calvin’s attempts to restore 
the uncompromising otherworldliness of the Christian faith; it is 
equally present, albeit on an altogether different level, in the ex- 
propriation of the peasantry, which was the unforeseen conse- 

[ 251 ] 


quence of the expropriation of church property and, as such, the 
greatest single factor in the breakdown of the feudal system.It is, 
of course, idle to speculate on what the course of our economy 
would have been without this event, whose impact propelled 
Western mankind into a development in which all property was 
destroyed in the process of its appropriation, all things devoured in 
the process of their production, and the stability of the world 
undermined in a constant process of change. Yet, such speculations 
are meaningful to the extent that they remind us that history is a 
story of events and not of forces or ideas with predictable courses. 
They are idle and even dangerous when used as arguments against 
reality and when meant to point to positive potentialities and al- 
ternatives, because their number is not only indefinite by definition 
but they also lack the tangible unexpectedness of the event, and 
compensate for it by mere plausibility. Thus, they remain sheer 
phantoms no matter in how pedestrian a manner they may be 
presented. 

In order not to underestimate the momentum this process has 
reached after centuries of almost unhindered development, it may be 
well to reflect on the so-called “economic miracle” of postwar 
Germany, a miracle only if seen in an outdated frame of reference. 
The German example shows very clearly that under modern condi- 
tions the expropriation of people, the destruction of objects, and 
the devastation of cities will turn out to be a radical stimulant for a 
process, not of mere recovery, but of quicker and more efficient 
accumulation of wealth — if only the country is modern enough to 
respond in terms of the production process. In Germany, outright 
destruction took the place of the relentless process of depreciation 
of all worldly things, which is the hallmark of the waste economy 

[ 212 ] 

in which we now live. The result is almost the same: a booming 
prosperity which, as postwar Germany illustrates, feeds not on the 
abundance of material goods or on anything stable and given but on 
the process of production and consumption itself. Under modern 
conditions, not destruction but conservation spells ruin because the 
very durability of conserved objects is the greatest impediment to 
the turnover process, whose constant gain in speed is the only con- 
stancy left wherever it has taken hold.

We saw before that property, as distinguished from wealth and 
appropriation, indicates the privately owned share of a common 
world and therefore is the most elementary political condition for 
man’s worldliness. By the same token, expropriation and world 
alienation coincide, and the modern age, very much against the in- 
tentions of all the actors in the play, began by alienating certain 
strata of the population from the world. We tend to overlook the 
central importance of this alienation for the modern age because we 
usually stress its secular character and identify the term secularity 
with worldliness. Yet secularization as a tangible historical event 
means no more than separation of Church and State, of religion and 
politics, and this, from a religious viewpoint, implies a return to 
the early Christian attitude of “Render unto Caesar the things that 
are Caesar’s and unto God the things that are God’s” rather than a 
loss of faith and transcendence or a new and emphatic interest in 
the things of this world. 

Modern loss of faith is not religious in origin — it cannot be 
traced to the Reformation and Counter Reformation, the two great 
religious movements of the modern age — and its scope is by no 
means restricted to the religious sphere. Moreover, even if we ad- 
mitted that the modern age began with a sudden, inexplicable

[ 253 ] 

eclipse of transcendence, of belief in a hereafter, it would by no 
means follow that this loss threw man back upon the world. The 
historical evidence, on the contrary, shows that modem men were 
not thrown back upon this world but upon themselves. One of the 
most persistent trends in modern philosophy since Descartes and 
perhaps its most original contribution to philosophy has been an 
exclusive concern with the self, as distinguished from the soul or 
person or man in general, an attempt to reduce all experiences, 
with the world as well as with other human beings, to experiences 
between man and himself. The greatness of Max Weber’s dis- 
covery about the origins of capitalism lay precisely in his demon- 
stration that an enormous, strictly mundane activity is possible 
without any care for or enjoyment of the world whatever, an ac- 
tivity whose deepest motivation, on the contrary, is worry and 
care about the self. World alienation, and not self-alienation as 
Marx thought, has been the hallmark of the modem age. 

Expropriation, the deprivation for certain groups of their place 

[ 2S4 ] 

in the world and their naked exposure to the exigencies of life, 
created both the original accumulation of wealth and the possibility 
of transforming this wealth into capital through labor. These to- 
gether constituted the conditions for the rise of a capitalist econ- 
omy. That this development, started by expropriation and fed upon 
it, would result in an enormous increase in human productivity was 
manifest from the beginning, centuries before the industrial revolu- 
tion. The new laboring class, which literally lived from hand to 
mouth, stood not only directly under the compelling urgency of 
life’s necessity but was at the same time alienated from all cares 
and worries which did not immediately follow from the life process 
itself. What was liberated in the early stages of the first free la- 
boring class in history was the force inherent in “labor power,” 
that is, in the sheer natural abundance of the biological process, 
which like all natural forces — of procreation no less than of labor- 
ing — provides for a generous surplus over and beyond the repro- 
duction of young to balance the old. What distinguishes this devel- 
opment at the beginning of the modern age from similar occur- 
rences in the past is that expropriation and wealth accumulation did 
not simply result in new property or lead to a new redistribution of 
wealth, but were fed back into the process to generate further 
expropriations, greater productivity, and more appropriation. 

In other words, the liberation of labor power as a natural process 
did not remain restricted to certain classes of society, and ap- 
propriation did not come to an end with the satisfaction of wants 
and desires; capital accumulation, therefore, did not lead to the 
stagnation we know so well from rich empires prior to the modern 
age, but spread throughout the society and initiated a steadily in- 
creasing flow of wealth. But this process, which indeed is the “life 
process of society,” as Marx used to call it, and whose wealth- 
producing capacity can be compared only with the fertility of natu- 
ral processes where the creation of one man and one woman would 
suffice to produce by multiplication any given number of human 
beings, remains bound to the principle of world alienation from 

[ 255 ] 

which it sprang; the process can continue only provided that no 
worldly durability and stability is permitted to interfere, only as 
long as all worldly things, all end products of the production proc- 
ess, are fed back into it at an ever-increasing speed. In other words, 
the process of wealth accumulation, as we know it, stimulated by 
the life process and in turn stimulating human life, is possible only 
if the world and the very worldliness of man are sacrificed. 

The first stage of this alienation was marked by its cruelty, the 
misery and material wretchedness it meant for a steadily increasing 
number of “labouring poor,” whom expropriation deprived of the 
twofold protection of family and property, that is, of a family- 
owned private share in the world, which until the modern age had 
housed the individual life process and the laboring activity subject 
to its necessities. The second stage was reached when society be- 
came the subject of the new life process, as the family had been its 
subject before. Membership in a social class replaced the protection 
previously offered by membership in a family, and social solidarity 
became a very efficient substitute for the earlier, natural solidarity 
ruling the family unit. Moreover, society as a whole, the “collec- 
tive subject” of the life process, by no means remained an in- 
tangible entity, the “communist fiction” needed by classical eco- 
nomics; just as the family unit had been identified with a privately 
owned piece of the world, its property, society was identified with 
a tangible, albeit collectively owned, piece of property, the terri- 
tory of the nation-state, which until its decline in the twentieth 
century offered all classes a substitute for the privately owned 
home of which the class of the poor had been deprived. 

The organic theories of nationalism, especially in its Central 
European version, all rest on an identification of the nation and the 
relationships between its members with the family and family rela- 
tionships. Because society becomes the substitute for the family, 
“blood and soil” is supposed to rule the relationships between its 
members; homogeneity of population and its rootedness in the soil 
of a given territory become the requisites for the nation-state ev- 
erywhere. However, while this development undoubtedly miti- 
gated cruelty and misery, it hardly influenced the process of ex- 
propriation and world alienation, since collective ownership, 
strictly speaking, is a contradiction in terms. 

[ 256 ] 


The decline of the European nation-state system; the economic 
and geographic shrinkage of the earth, so that prosperity and de- 
pression tend to become world-wide phenomena; the transforma- 
tion of mankind, which until our own time was an abstract notion 
or a guiding principle for humanists only, into a really existing 
entity whose members at the most distant points of the globe need 
less time to meet than the members of a nation needed a generation 
ago — these mark the beginnings of the last stage in this develop- 
ment. Just as the family and its property were replaced by class 
membership and national territory, so mankind now begins to re- 
place nationally bound societies, and the earth replaces the limited 
state territory. But whatever the future may bring, the process of 
world alienation, started by expropriation and characterized by an 
ever-increasing progress in wealth, can only assume even more 
radical proportions if it is permitted to follow its own inherent law. 
For men cannot become citizens of the world as they are citizens of 
their countries, and social men cannot own collectively as family 
and household men own their private property. The rise of society 
brought about the simultaneous decline of the public as well as the 
private realm. But the eclipse of a common public world, so crucial 
to the formation of the lonely mass man and so dangerous in the 
formation of the worldless mentality of modern ideological mass 
movements, began with the much more tangible loss of a privately 
owned share in the world. 

[[[THE DISCOVERY OF THE ARCHIMEDEAN POINT]]]

“Since a babe was born in a manger, it may be doubted whether so 
great a thing has happened with so little stir.” These are the words 
with which Whitehead introduces Galileo and the discovery of the 
telescope on the stage of the “modem world .” Nothing in these 
words is an exaggeration. Like the birth in a manger, which 
spelled not the end of antiquity but the beginning of something so 
unexpectedly and unpredictably new that neither hope nor fear 
could have anticipated it, these first tentative glances into the uni- 

[ 257 ] 

verse through an instrument, at once adjusted to human senses and 
destined to uncover what definitely and forever must lie beyond 
them, set the stage for an entirely new world and determined the 
course of other events, which with much greater stir were to usher 
in the modern age. Except for the numerically small, politically in- 
consequential milieu of learned men- — astronomers, philosophers, 
and theologians— the telescope created no great excitement; public 
attention was drawn, rather, to Galileo’s dramatic demonstration 
of the laws of falling bodies, taken to be the beginning of modern 
natural science (although it may be doubted that by themselves, 
without being transformed later by Newton into the universal law 
of gravitation — still one of the most grandiose examples of the 
modern amalgamation of astronomy and physics — they would ever 
have led the new science on the path of astrophysics) . For what 
most drastically distinguished the new world view not only from 
that of antiquity or the Middle Ages, but from the great thirst for 
direct experience in the Renaissance as well, was the assumption 
that the same kind of exterior force should be manifest in the fall of 
terrestrial and the movements of heavenly bodies. 

Moreover, the novelty of Galileo’s discovery was clouded by 
its close relationship to antecedents and predecessors. Not the 
philosophical speculations of Nicholas of Cusa and Giordano Bruno 
alone, but the mathematically trained imagination of the astrono- 
mers, Copernicus and Kepler, had challenged the finite, geocentric 
world view which men had held since time immemorial. Not 
Galileo but the philosophers were the first to abolish the dichotomy 
between one earth and one sky above it, promoting, as they 
thought, the earth “to the rank of the noble stars” and finding her a 
home in an eternal and infinite universe. And it seems the as- 
tronomers needed no telescope to assert that, contrary to all sense 
experience, it is not the sun that moves around the earth but the 
earth that circles the sun. If the historian looks back upon these 
beginnings with all the wisdom and prejudices of hindsight, he is 
tempted to conclude that no empirical confirmation was needed to 
abolish the Ptolemaic system. What was wanted was, rather, the 

[ 2S8 ] 


speculative courage to follow the ancient and medieval principle of 
simplicity in nature — even if it led to the denial of all sense experi- 
ence — and the great boldness of Copernicus’ imagination, which 
lifted him from the earth and enabled him to look down upon her as 
though he actually were an inhabitant of the sun. And the historian 
feels justified in his conclusions when he considers that Galileo’s 
discoveries were preceded by a “veritable retour a Archimede” 
which had been effective since the Renaissance. It certainly is sug- 
gestive that Leonardo studied him with passionate interest and 
that Galileo can be called his disciple. 

However, neither the speculations of philosophers nor the im- 
aginings of astronomers has ever constituted an event. Prior to 
the telescopic discoveries of Galileo, Giordano Bruno’s philosophy 
attracted little attention even among learned men, and without the 
factual confirmation they bestowed upon the Copernican revolu- 
tion, not only the theologians but all “sensible men . . . would 
have pronounced it a wild appeal ... of an uncontrolled imagina- 
tion.” In the realm of ideas there are only originality and depth, 
both personal qualities, but no absolute, objective novelty; ideas 
come and go, they have a permanence, even an immortality of their 
own, depending upon their inherent power of illumination, which 
is and endures independently of time and history. Ideas, moreover, 
as distinguished from events, are never unprecedented, and em- 
pirically unconfirmed speculations about the earth’s movement 
around the sun were no more unprecedented than contemporary 
theories about atoms would be if they had no basis in experiments 
and no consequences in the factual world. What Galileo did and 
what nobody had done before was to use the telescope in such a 

[ 259 ] 

way that the secrets of the universe were delivered to human cogni- 
tion “with the certainty of sense-perception ”; that is, he put 
within the grasp of an earth-bound creature and its body-bound 
senses what had seemed forever beyond his reach, at best open to 
the uncertainties of speculation and imagination. 

This difference in relevance between the Copernican system and 
Galileo’s discoveries was quite clearly understood by the Catholic 
Church, which raised no objections to the pre-Galilean theory of 
an immobile sun and a moving earth as long as the astronomers 
used it as a convenient hypothesis for mathematical purposes; but, 
as Cardinal Bellarmine pointed out to Galileo, “to prove that the 
hypothesis . . . saves the appearances is not at all the same thing as 
to demonstrate the reality of the movement of the earth.” How 
pertinent this remark was could be seen immediately by the sudden 
change of mood which overtook the learned world after the con- 
firmation of Galileo’s discovery. From then on, the enthusiasm 
with which Giordano Bruno had conceived of an infinite universe, 
and the pious exultation with which Kepler had contemplated the 
sun, “the most excellent of all the bodies in the universe whose 
whole essence is nothing but pure light” and which therefore was 
to him the most fitting dwelling place of “God and the blessed 
angels,” or the more sober satisfaction of Nicholas of Cusa of see- 
ing the earth finally at home in the starred sky, were conspicuous 
by their absence. By “confirming” his predecessors, Galileo estab- 
lished a demonstrable fact where before him there were inspired 
speculations. The immediate philosophic reaction to this reality 
was not exultation but the Cartesian doubt by which modern 
philosophy — that “school of suspicion,” as Nietzsche once called 

[ 260 ] 

it— was founded, and which ended in the conviction that “only on 
the firm foundation of unyielding despair can the soul’s habitation 
henceforth be safely built .” 

For many centuries the consequences of this event, again not 
unlike the consequences of the Nativity, remained contradictory 
and inconclusive, and even today the conflict between the event 
itself and its almost immediate consequences is far from resolved. 
The rise of the natural sciences is credited with a demonstrable, 
ever -quickening increase inhuman knowledge and power; shortly 
before the modern age European mankind knew less than Archi- 
medes in the third century b.c., while the first fifty years of our 
century have witnessed more important discoveries than all the 
centuries of recorded history together. Yet the same phenomenon 
is blamed with equal right for the hardly less demonstrable in- 
crease in human despair or the specifically modern nihilism which 
has spread to ever larger sections of the population, their most sig- 
nificant aspect perhaps being that they no longer spare the scien- 
tists themselves, whose well-founded optimism could still, in the 
nineteenth century, stand up against the equally justifiable pessi- 
mism of thinkers and poets. The modern astrophysical world view, 
which began with Galileo, and its challenge to the adequacy of the 
senses to reveal reality, have left us a universe of whose qualities 
we know no more than the way they affect our measuring instru- 
ments, and — in the words of Eddington — “the former have as much 
resemblance to the latter as a telephone number has to a sub- 
scriber.” Instead of objective qualities, in other words, we find 
instruments, and instead of nature or the universe — in the words of 
Heisenberg — man encounters only himself.

[ 261 ] 

The point, in our context, is that both despair and triumph are 
inherent in the same event. If we wish to put this into historical 
perspective, it is as if Galileo’s discovery proved in demonstrable 
fact that both the worst fear and the most presumptuous hope of 
human speculation, the ancient fear that our senses, our very or- 
gans for the reception of reality, might betray us, and the Archi- 
medean wish for a point outside the earth from which to unhinge 
the world, could only come true together, as though the wish 
would be granted only provided that we lost reality and the fear 
was to be consummated only if compensated by the acquisition of 
supramundane powers. For whatever we do today in physics— 
whether we release energy processes that ordinarily go on only in 
the sun, or attempt to initiate in a test tube the processes of cosmic 
evolution, or penetrate with the help of telescopes the cosmic 
space to a limit of two and even six billion light years, or build 
machines for the production and control of energies unknown in 
the household of earthly nature, or attain speeds in atomic accelera- 
tors which approach the speed of light, or produce elements not to 
be found in nature, or disperse radioactive particles, created by us 
through the use of cosmic radiation, on the earth — we always 
handle nature from a point in the universe outside the earth. With- 
out actually standing where Archimedes wished to stand ( dos moi 
pou sto), still bound to the earth through the human condition, we 
have found a way to act on the earth and within terrestrial nature 
as though we dispose of it from outside, from the Archimedean 
point. And even at the risk of endangering the natural life process 
we expose the earth to universal, cosmic forces alien to nature’s 
household. 

While these achievements were anticipated by no one, and while 
most present-day theories flatly contradict those formulated during 
the first centuries of the modern age, this development itself was 
possible only because at the beginning the old dichotomy between 
earth and sky was abolished and a unification of the universe ef- 
fected, so that from then on nothing occurring in earthly nature 

[ 262 ] 

was viewed as a mere earthly happening. All events were consid- 
ered to be subject to a universally valid law in the fullest sense of 
the word, which means, among other things, valid beyond the 
reach of human sense experience (even of the sense experiences 
made with the help of the finest instruments), valid beyond the 
reach of human memory and the appearance of mankind on earth, 
valid even beyond the coming into existence of organic life and the 
earth herself. All laws of the new astrophysical science are formu- 
lated from the Archimedean point, and this point probably lies 
much farther away from the earth and exerts much more power 
over her than Archimedes or Galileo ever dared to think. 

If scientists today point out that we may assume with equal 
validity that the earth turns around the sun or the sun turns around 
the earth, that both assumptions are in agreement with observed 
phenomena and the difference is only a difference of the chosen 
point of reference, it by no means indicates a return to Cardinal 
Bellarmine’s or Copernicus’ position, where the astronomers dealt 
with mere hypotheses. It rather signifies that we have moved the 
Archimedean point one step farther away from the earth to a point 
in the universe where neither earth nor sun are centers of a uni- 
versal system. It means that we no longer feel bound even to the 
sun, that we move freely in the universe, choosing our point of 
reference wherever it may be convenient for a specific purpose. 
For the actual accomplishments of modem science this change 
from the earlier heliocentric system to a system without a fixed 
center is, no doubt, as important as the original shift from the geo- 
centric to the heliocentric world view. Only now have we estab- 
lished ourselves as “universal” beings, as creatures who are ter- 
restrial not by nature and essence but only by the condition of 
being alive, and who therefore by virtue of reasoning can overcome 
this condition not in mere speculation but in actual fact. Yet the 
general relativism that results automatically from the shift from a 
heliocentric to a centerless world view — conceptualized in Ein- 
stein’s theory of relativity with its denial that “at a definite present 
instant all matter is simultaneously real” and the concomitant, 
implied denial that Being which appears in time and space pos- 
sesses an absolute reality — was already contained in, or at least 

[ 263 ] 

preceded by, those seventeenth-century theories according to 
which blue is nothing but a “relation to a seeing eye” and heaviness 
nothing but a “relation of reciprocal acceleration.” The parentage 
of modern relativism is not in Einstein but in Galileo and Newton. 

What ushered in the modern age was not the age-old desire of 
astronomers for simplicity, harmony, and beauty, which made 
Copernicus look upon the orbits of the planets from the sun instead 
of the earth, nor the Renaissance’s new-awakened love for the 
earth and the world, with its rebellion against the rationalism of 
medieval scholasticism; this love of the world, on the contrary, 
was the first to fall victim to the modern age’s triumphal world 
alienation. It was rather the discovery, due to the new instrument, 
that Copernicus’ image of “the virile man standing in the sun . . . 
overlooking the planets” was much more than an image or a ges- 
ture, was in fact an indication of the astounding human capacity to 
think in terms of the universe while remaining on the earth, and the 
perhaps even more astounding human ability to use cosmic laws as 
guiding principles for terrestrial action. Compared with the earth 
alienation underlying the whole development of natural science in 
the modern age, the withdrawal from terrestrial proximity con- 
tained in the discovery of the globe as a whole and the world aliena- 
tion produced in the twofold process of expropriation and wealth 
accumulation are of minor significance. 

At any event, while world alienation determined the course and 
the development of modern society, earth alienation became and 
has remained the hallmark of modern science. Under the sign of 
earth alienation, every science, not only physical and natural sci- 
ence, so radically changed its innermost content that one may 
doubt whether prior to the modern age anything like science ex- 
isted at all. This is perhaps clearest in the development of the new 
science’s most important mental instrument, the devices of modern 
algebra, by which mathematics “succeeded in freeing itself from 

[ 264 ] 

the shackles of spatiality,” that is, from geometry, which, as the 
name indicates, depends on terrestrial measures and measurements. 
Modern mathematics freed man from the shackles of earth-bound 
experience and his power of cognition from the shackles of finitude. 

The decisive point here is not that men at the beginning of the 
modern age still believed with Plato in the mathematical structure 
of the universe nor that, one generation later, they believed with 
Descartes that certain knowledge is possible only where the mind 
plays with its own forms and formulas. What is decisive is the 
entirely un-Platonic subjection of geometry to algebraic treat- 
ment, which discloses the modern ideal of reducing terrestrial 
sense data and movements to mathematical symbols. Without this 
non-spatial symbolic language Newton would not have been able 
to unite astronomy and physics into a single science or, to put it 
another way, to formulate a law of gravitation where the same 
equation will cover the movements of heavenly bodies in the sky 
and the motion of terrestrial bodies on earth. Even then it was clear 
that modern mathematics, in an already breathtaking development, 
had discovered the amazing human faculty to grasp in symbols 
those dimensions and concepts which at most had been thought of 
as negations and hence limitations of the mind, because their im- 
mensity seemed to transcend the minds of mere mortals, whose 
existence lasts an insignificant time and remains bound to a not too 
important corner of the universe. Yet even more significant than 
this possibility — to reckon with entities which could not be “seen” 
by the eye of the mind — was the fact that the new mental instru- 
ment, in this respect even newer and more significant than all the 
scientific tools it helped to devise, opened the way for an alto- 
gether novel mode of meeting and approaching nature in the ex- 
periment. In the experiment man realized his newly won freedom 
from the shackles of earth-bound experience; instead of observing 
natural phenomena as they were given to him, he placed nature 
under the conditions of his own mind, that is, under conditions won 
from a universal, astrophysical viewpoint, a cosmic standpoint 
outside nature itself. 

It is for this reason that mathematics became the leading science 
of the modern age, and this elevation has nothing to do with Plato, 

[ 265 ] 


who deemed mathematics to be the noblest of all sciences, second 
only to philosophy, which he thought nobody should be permitted 
to approach without having become familiar first with the mathe- 
matical world of ideal forms. For mathematics (that is, geometry) 
was the proper introduction to that sky of ideas where no mere im- 
ages ( eidola ) and shadows, no perishable matter, could any longer 
interfere with the appearing of eternal being, where these appear- 
ances are saved (sozein ta phainomena) and safe, as purified of hu- 
man sensuality and mortality as of material perishability. Yet 
mathematical and ideal forms were not the products of the intel- 
lect, but given to the eyes of the mind as sense data were given to 
the organs of the senses; and those who were trained to perceive 
what was hidden from the eyes of bodily vision and the untrained 
mind of the many perceived true being, or rather being in its true 
appearance. With the rise of modernity, mathematics does not 
simply enlarge its content or reach out into the infinite to become 
applicable to the immensity of an infinite and infinitely growing, 
expanding universe, but ceases to be concerned with appearances at 
all. It is no longer the beginning of philosophy, of the “science” of 
Being in its true appearance, but becomes instead the science of the 
structure of the human mind. 

When Descartes’ analytical geometry treated space and exten- 
sion, the res extensa of nature and the world, so “that its relations, 
however complicated, must always be expressible in algebraic 
formulae,” mathematics succeeded in reducing and translating all 
that man is not into patterns which are identical with human, 
mental structures. When, moreover, the same analytical geometry 
proved “conversely that numerical truths . . . can be fully repre- 
sented spatially,” a physical science had been evolved which re- 
quired no principles for its completion beyond those of pure mathe- 
matics, and in this science man could move, risk himself into space 
and be certain that he would not encounter anything but himself, 
nothing that could not be reduced to patterns present in him. Now 
the phenomena could be saved only in so far as they could be re- 
duced to a mathematical order, and this mathematical operation 
does not serve to prepare man’s mind for the revelation of true 
being by directing it to the ideal measures that appear in the 

[ 266 ] 

sensually given data, but serves, on the contrary, to reduce these 
data to the measure of the human mind, which, given enough dis- 
tance, being sufficiently remote and uninvolved, can look upon and 
handle the multitude and variety of the concrete in accordance with 
its own patterns and symbols. These are no longer ideal forms dis- 
closed to the eye of the mind, but are the results of removing the 
eyes of the mind, no less than the eyes of the body, from the phe- 
nomena, of reducing all appearances through the force inherent in 
distance. 

Under this condition of remoteness, every assemblage of things 
is transformed into a mere multitude, and every multitude, no 
matter how disordered, incoherent, and confused, will fall into 
certain patterns and configurations possessing the same validity 
and no more significance than the mathematical curve, which, as 
Leibniz once remarked, can always be found between points 
thrown at random on a piece of paper. For if “it can be shown that 
a mathematical web of some kind can be woven about any universe 
containing several objects . . . then the fact that our universe lends 
itself to mathematical treatment is not a fact of any great philo- 
sophic significance.” It certainly is neither a demonstration of an 
inherent and inherently beautiful order of nature nor does it offer a 
confirmation of the human mind, of its capacity to surpass the 
senses in perceptivity or of its adequateness as an organ for the 
reception of truth. 

The modern reductio scientiae ad mathematicam has overruled the 
testimony of nature as witnessed at close range by human senses in 
the same way that Leibniz overruled the knowledge of the hap- 
hazard origin and the chaotic nature of the dot-covered piece of 
paper. And the feeling of suspicion, outrage, and despair, which 
was the first, and spiritually is still the most lasting consequence of 
the discovery that the ‘Archimedean point was no vain dream of 
idle speculation, is not unlike the helpless outrage of a man who, 

[ 267 ] 

having watched with his own eyes how these dots were thrown 
arbitrarily and without foresight onto the paper, is shown and 
forced to admit that all his senses and all his powers of judgment 
have betrayed him and that what he saw was the evolution of a 
“geometrical line whose direction is constantly and uniformly 
defined by one rule .”


[[[UNIVERSAL VERSUS NATURAL SCIENCE]]]

It took many generations and quite a few centuries before the true 
meaning of the Copernican revolution and the discovery of the 
Archimedean point came to light. Only we, and we only for hardly 
more than a few decades, have come to live in a world thoroughly 
determined by a science and a technology whose objective truth 
and practical know-how are derived from cosmic and universal, as 
distinguished from terrestrial and “natural,” laws, and in which a 
knowledge acquired by selecting a point of reference outside the 
earth is applied to earthly nature and the human artifice. There is a 
deep gulf between those before us who knew that the earth re- 
volves around the sun, that neither the one nor the other is the cen- 
ter of the universe, and who concluded that man had lost his home 
as well as his privileged position in creation, and ourselves, who 
still and probably forever are earth-bound creatures, dependent 
upon metabolism with a terrestrial nature, and who have found the 
means to bring about processes of cosmic origin and possibly 
cosmic dimension. If one wishes to draw a distinctive line between 
the modern age and the world we have come to live in, he may. well 
find it in the difference between a science which looks upon nature 
from a universal standpoint and thus acquires complete mastery 
over her, on one hand, and a truly “universal” science, on the 
other, which imports cosmic processes into nature even at the ob- 
vious risk of destroying her and, with her, man’s mastership over 
her. 

Foremost in our minds at this moment is of course the enor- 
mously increased human power of destruction, that we are able to 

[ 268 ] 

destroy all organic life on earth and shall probably be able one day 
to destroy even the earth itself. However, no less awesome and no 
less difficult to come to terms with is the corresponding new crea- 
tive power, that we can produce new elements never found in 
nature, that we are able not only to speculate about the relation- 
ships between mass and energy and their innermost identity but 
actually to transform mass into energy or to transform radiation 
into matter. At the same time, we have begun to populate the space 
surrounding the earth with man-made stars, creating as it were, in 
the form of satellites, new heavenly bodies, and we hope that in a 
not very distant future we shall be able to perform what times before 
us regarded as the greatest, the deepest, and holiest secret of na- 
ture, to create or re-create the miracle of life. I use the word “cre- 
ate” deliberately, to indicate that we are actually doing what all 
ages before ours thought to be the exclusive prerogative of divine 
action. 

This thought strikes us as blasphemous, and though it is blasphe- 
mous in every traditional Western or Eastern philosophic or theo- 
logical frame of reference, it is no more blasphemous than what we 
have been doing and what we are aspiring to do. The thought loses 
its blasphemous character, however, as soon as we understand 
what Archimedes understood so well, even though he did not know 
how to reach his point outside the earth, namely, that no matter 
how we explain the evolution of the earth and nature and man, they 
must have come into being by some transmundane, “universal” 
force, whose work must be comprehensible to the point of imita- 
tion by somebody who is able to occupy the same location. It is 
ultimately nothing but this assumed location in the universe out- 
side the earth that enables us to produce processes which do not 
occur on the earth and play no role in stable matter but are decisive 
for the coming into being of matter. It is indeed in the very nature 
of the thing that astrophysics and not geophysics, that “universal” 
science and not “natural” science, should have been able to pene- 
trate the last secrets of the earth and of nature. From the viewpoint 
of the universe, the earth is but a special case and can be under- 
stood as such, just as in this view there cannot be a decisive distinc- 

[ 269 ] 

tion between matter and energy, both being “only different forms 
of the selfsame basic substance.”

With Galileo already, certainly since Newton, the word “uni- 
versal” has begun to acquire a very specific meaning indeed; it 
means “valid beyond our solar system.” And something quite 
similar has happened to another word of philosophic origin, the 
word “absolute,” which is applied to “absolute time,” “absolute 
space,” “absolute motion,” or “absolute speed,” in each usage 
meaning a time, a space, a movement, a velocity which is present 
in the universe and compared to which earth-bound time or space 
or movement or speed are only “relative.” Everything happening 
on earth has become relative since the earth’s relatedness to the 
universe became the point of reference for all measurements. 

Philosophically, it seems that man’s ability to take this cosmic, 
universal standpoint without changing his location is the clearest 
possible indication of his universal origin, as it were. It is as though 
we no longer needed theology to tell us that man is not, cannot 
possibly be, of this world even though he spends his life here; and 
we may one day be able to look upon the age-old enthusiasm of 
philosophers for the universal as the first indication, as though they 
alone possessed a foreboding, that the time would come when men 
would have to live under the earth’s conditions and at the same 
time be able to look upon and act on her from a point outside. (The 
trouble is only — or so it seems now — that while man can do things 
from a “universal,” absolute standpoint, what the philosophers had 
never deemed possible, he has lost his capacity to think in universal, 
absolute terms, thus realizing and defeating at the same time the 
standards and ideals of traditional philosophy. Instead of the old 
dichotomy between earth and sky we have a new one between man 
and the universe, or between the capacities of the human mind for 
understanding and the universal laws which man can discover and 
handle without true comprehension.) Whatever the rewards and 
the burdens of this yet uncertain future may turn out to be, one 
thing is sure: while it may affect greatly, perhaps even radically, 
the vocabulary and metaphoric content of existing religions, it 

[ 270 ]

neither abolishes nor removes nor even shifts the unknown that is 
the region of faith. 

While the new science, the science of the Archimedean point, 
needed centuries and generations to develop its full potentialities, 
taking roughly two hundred years before it even began to change 
the world and to establish new conditions for the life of man, it 
took no more than a few decades, hardly one generation, for the 
human mind to draw certain conclusions from Galileo’s discoveries 
and the methods and assumption by which they had been accom- 
plished. The human mind changed in a matter of years or decades 
as radically as the human world in a matter of centuries; and while 
this change naturally remained restricted to the few who belonged 
to that strangest of all modern societies, the society of scientists 
and the republic of letters (the only society which has survived all 
changes of conviction and conflict without a revolution and without 
ever forgetting to “honor the man whose beliefs it no longer 
shares ”), this society anticipated in many respects, by sheer force 
of trained and controlled imagination, the radical change of mind of 
all modern men which became a politically demonstrable reality 
only in our own time. Descartes is no less the father of modern 

[ 271 ] 

philosophy than Galileo is the ancestor of modern science, and 
while it is true that after the seventeenth century, and chiefly be- 
cause of the development of modern philosophy, science and phi- 
losophy parted company more radically than ever before — New- 
ton was almost the last to consider his own endeavors as “experi- 
mental philosophy” and to offer his discoveries to the reflection of 
“astronomers and philosophers,” as Kant was the last philosopher 
who was also a kind of astronomer and natural scientist — modern 
philosophy owes its origin and its course more exclusively to spe- 
cific scientific discoveries than any previous philosophy. That this 
philosophy, the exact counterpart of a scientific world view long 
since discarded, has not become obsolete today is not only due to 
the nature of philosophy, which, wherever it is authentic, possesses 
the same permanence and durability as art works, but is in this 
particular case closely related to the eventual evolution of a world 
where truths for many centuries accessible only to the few have 
become realities for everybody. 

It would be folly indeed to overlook the almost too precise con- 
gruity of modern man’s world alienation with the subjectivism of 
modern philosophy, from Descartes and Hobbes to English sen- 
sualism, empiricism, and pragmatism, as well as German idealism 
and materialism up to the recent phenomenological existentialism 
and logical or epistemological positivism. But it would be equally 
foolish to believe that what turned the philosopher’s mind away 
from the old metaphysical questions toward a great variety of in- 
trospections — introspection into his sensual or cognitive apparatus, 
into his consciousness, into psychological and logical processes — 
was an impetus that grew out of an autonomous development of 
ideas, or, in a variation of the same approach, to believe that our 
world would have become different if only philosophy had held 

[ in ] 

fast to tradition. As we said before, not ideas but events change the 
world — the heliocentric system as an idea is as old as Pythagorean 
speculation and as persistent in our history as Neo-Platonic tradi- 
tions, without, for that matter, ever having changed the world or 
the human mind— and the author of the decisive event of the mod- 
ern age is Galileo rather than Descartes. Descartes himself was 
quite aware of this, and when he heard of Galileo’s trial and his 
recantation, he was tempted for a moment to burn all his papers, 
because “if the movement of the earth is false, all the foundations 
of my philosophy are also false .” But Descartes and the philoso- 
phers, since they elevated what had happened to the level of uncom- 
promising thought, registered with unequaled precision the enor- 
mous shock of the event; they anticipated, at least partially, the 
very perplexities inherent in the new standpoint of man with which 
the scientists were too busy to bother until, in our own time, they 
began to appear in their own work and to interfere with their own 
inquiries. Since then, the curious discrepancy between the mood of 
modern philosophy, which from the beginning had been predomi- 
nantly pessimistic, and the mood of modern science, which until 
very recently had been so buoyantly optimistic, has been bridged. 
There seems to be little cheerfulness left in either of them. 

[[[THE RISE OF THE CARTESIAN DOUBT]]]

Modern philosophy began with Descartes’ de omnibus dubitandum 
est, with doubt, but with doubt not as an inherent control of the 
human mind to guard against deceptions of thought and illusions of 
sense, not as skepticism against the morals and prejudices of men 
and times, not even as a critical method in scientific inquiry and 
philosophic speculation. Cartesian doubt is much more far-reaching 
in scope and too fundamental in intent to be determined by such 
concrete contents. In modern philosophy and thought, doubt occu- 
pies much the same central position as that occupied for all the 
centuries before by the Greek thaumazein , the wonder at every- 
thing that is as it is. Descartes was the first to conceptualize this 
modern doubting, which after him became the self-evident, in- 



[ 273 ] 


audible motor which has moved all thought, the invisible axis 
around which all thinking has been centered. Just as from Plato and 
Aristotle to the modern age conceptual philosophy, in its greatest 
and most authentic representatives, had been the articulation of 
wonder, so modern philosophy since Descartes has consisted in the 
articulations and ramifications of doubting. 

Cartesian doubt, in its radical and universal significance, was 
originally the response to a new reality, a reality no less real for its 
being restricted for centuries to the small and politically insignifi- 
cant circle of scholars and learned men. The philosophers under- 
stood at once that Galileo’s discoveries implied no mere challenge 
to the testimony of the senses and that it was no longer reason, as 
in Aristarchus and Copernicus, that had “committed such a rape 
on their senses,” in which case men indeed would have needed only 
to choose between their faculties and to let innate reason become 
“the mistress of their credulity.” It was not reason but a man- 
made instrument, the telescope, which actually changed the physi- 
cal world view; it was not contemplation, observation, and specula- 
tion which led to the new knowledge, but the active stepping in of 
homo faber, of making and fabricating. In other words, man had 
been deceived so long as he trusted that reality and truth would 
reveal themselves to his senses and to his reason if only he re- 
mained true to what he saw with the eyes of body and mind. The 
old opposition of sensual and rational truth, of the inferior truth 
capacity of the senses and the superior truth capacity of reason, 
paled beside this challenge, beside the obvious implication that 
neither truth nor reality is given, that neither of them appears as 
it is, and that only interference with appearance, doing away with 
appearances, can hold out a hope for true knowledge. 

The extent to which reason and faith in reason depend not upon 
single sense perceptions, each of which may be an illusion, but 
upon the unquestioned assumption that the senses as a whole— kept 
together and ruled over by common sense, the sixth and the highest 
sense — fit man into the reality which surrounds him, was only now 

[ 274 ] 

discovered. If the human eye can betray man to the extent that so 
many generations of men were deceived into believing that the sun 
turns around the earth, then the metaphor of the eyes of the mind 
cannot possibly hold any longer; it was based, albeit implicitly and 
even when it was used in opposition to the senses, on an ultimate 
trust in bodily vision. If Being and Appearance part company for- 
ever, and this— as Marx once remarked — is indeed the basic as- 
sumption of all modern science, then there is nothing left to be 
taken upon faith; everything must be doubted. It was as though 
Democritus’ early prediction that a victory of the mind over the 
senses could end only in the mind’s defeat had come true, except 
that now the reading of an instrument seemed to have won a 
victory over both the mind and the senses.

The outstanding characteristic of Cartesian doubt is its univer- 
sality, that nothing, no thought and no experience, can escape it. 
No one perhaps explored its true dimensions more honestly than 
Kierkegaard when he leaped — not from reason, as he thought, but 
from doubt — into belief, thereby carrying doubt into the very 
heart of modern religion . Its universality spreads from the testi- 
mony of the senses to the testimony of reason to the testimony of 
faith because this doubt resides ultimately in the loss of self-evi- 
dence, and all thought had always started from what is evident in 
and by itself — evident not only for the thinker but for everybody. 
Cartesian doubt did not simply doubt that human understanding 
may not be open to every truth or that human vision may not be 
able to see everything, but that intelligibility to human understand- 
ing does not at all constitute a demonstration of truth, just as visi- 
bility did not at all constitute proof of reality. This doubt doubts 

[ 275 ] 

that such a thing as truth exists at all, and discovers thereby that 
the traditional concept of truth, whether based on sense perception 
or on reason or on belief in divine revelation, had rested on the 
twofold assumption that what truly is will appear of its own accord 
and that human capabilities are adequate to receive it.That truth 
reveals itself was the common creed of pagan and Hebrew antiq- 
uity, of Christian and secular philosophy. This is the reason why 
the new, modern philosophy turned with such vehemence — in fact 
with a violence bordering on hatred— against tradition, making 
short shrift of the enthusiastic Renaissance revival and rediscovery 
of antiquity. 

The poignancy of Descartes’ doubt is fully realized only if one 
understands that the new discoveries dealt an even more disastrous 
blow to human confidence in the world and in the universe than is 
indicated by a clear-cut separation of being and appearance. For 
here the relationship between these two is no longer static as it was 
in traditional skepticism, as though appearances simply hide and 
cover a true being which forever escapes the notice of man. This 
Being, on the contrary, is tremendously active and energetic: it 
creates its own appearances, except that these appearances are de- 
lusions. Whatever human senses perceive is brought about by in- 
visible, secret forces, and if through certain devices, ingenious in- 
struments, these forces are caught in the act rather than discovered 
—as an animal is trapped or a thief is caught much against their 
own will and intentions — it turns out that this tremendously effec- 

[ 27d ] 

tive Being is of such a nature that its disclosures must be illusions 
and that conclusions drawn from its appearances must be delusions. 

Descartes’ philosophy is haunted by two nightmares which in a 
sense became the nightmares of the whole modern age, not because 
this age was so deeply influenced by Cartesian philosophy, but be- 
cause their emergence was almost inescapable once the true impli- 
cations of the modern world view were understood. These night- 
mares are very simple and very well known. In the one, reality, the 
reality of the world as well as of human life, is doubted; if neither 
the senses nor common sense nor reason can be trusted, then it may 
well be that all that we take for reality is only a dream. The other 
concerns the general human condition as it was revealed by the 
new discoveries and the impossibility for man to trust his senses 
and his reason; under these circumstances it seems, indeed, much 
more likely that an evil spirit, a Dieu trompeur , wilfully and spite- 
fully betrays man than that God is the ruler of the universe. The 
consummate devilry of this evil spirit would consist in having cre- 
ated a creature which harbors a notion of truth only to bestow on it 
such other faculties that it will never be able to reach any truth, 
never be able to be certain of anything. 

Indeed, this last point, the question of certainty, was to become 
decisive for the whole development of modern morality. What was 
lost in the modem age, of course, was not the capacity for truth or 
reality or faith nor the concomitant inevitable acceptance of the 
testimony of the senses and of reason, but the certainty that for- 
merly went with it. In religion it was not belief in salvation or a 
hereafter that was immediately lost, but the certitudo salutis — and 
this happened in all Protestant countries where the downfall of the 
Catholic Church had eliminated the last tradition-bound institution 
which, wherever its authority remained unchallenged, stood be- 
tween the impact of modernity and the masses of believers. Just as 
the immediate consequence of this loss of certainty was a new zeal 
for making good in this life as though it were only an overlong 
period of probation , so the loss of certainty of truth ended in a 

[ 277 ] 

new, entirely unprecedented zeal for truthfulness— as though man 
could afford to be a liar only so long as he was certain of the 
unchallengeable existence of truth and objective reality, which 
surely would survive and defeat all his lies . 36 The radical change in 
moral standards occurring in the first century of the modern age 
was inspired by the needs and ideals of its most important group of 
men, the new scientists; and the modern cardinal virtues— success, 
industry, and truthfulness — are at the same time the greatest 
virtues of modern science.

The learned societies and Royal Academies became the morally 
influential centers where scientists were organized to find ways 
and means by which nature could be trapped by experiments and 
instruments so that she would be forced to yield her secrets. And 
this gigantic task, to which no single man but only the collective 
effort of the best minds of mankind could possibly be adequate, 
prescribed the rules of behavior and the new standards of judg- 
ment. Where formerly truth had resided in the kind of “theory” 
that since the Greeks had meant the contemplative glance of the 
beholder who was concerned with, and received, the reality open- 
ing up before him, the question of success took over and the test of 
theory became a “practical” one — whether or not it will work. 
Theory became hypothesis, and the success of the hypothesis be- 
came truth. This all-important standard of success, however, does 
not depend upon practical considerations or the technical develop- 
ments which may or may not accompany specific scientific dis- 
coveries. The criterion of success is inherent in the very essence 
and progress of modern science quite apart from its applicability. 
Success here is not at all the empty idol to which it degenerated in 

[ 278 ]

bourgeois society; it was, and in the sciences has been ever since, a 
veritable triumph of human ingenuity against overwhelming odds. 

The Cartesian solution of universal doubt or its salvation from 
the two interconnected nightmares — that everything is a dream 
and there is no reality and that not God but an evil spirit rules the 
world and mocks man— was similar in method and content to the 
turning away from truth to truthfulness and from reality to relia- 
bility. Descartes’ conviction that “though our mind is not the 
measure of things or of truth, it must assuredly be the measure of 
things that we affirm or deny” echoes what scientists in general 
and without explicit articulation had discovered: that even if there 
is no truth, man can be truthful, and even if there is no reliable 
certainty, man can be reliable. If there was salvation, it had to lie 
in man himself, and if there was a solution to the questions raised 
by doubting, it had to come from doubting. If everything has be- 
come doubtful, then doubting at least is certain and real. Whatever 
may be the state of reality and of truth as they are given to the 
senses and to reason, “nobody can doubt of his doubt and remain 
uncertain whether he doubts or does not doubt.” The famous 
cogito ergo sum (“I think, hence I am”) did not spring for Descartes 
from any self-certainty of thought as such — in which case, indeed, 
thought would have acquired a new dignity and significance for 
man — but was a mere generalization of a dubito ergo sum. HS In 

[ 279 ] 

other words, from the mere logical certainty that in doubting some- 
thing I remain aware of a process of doubting in my consciousness, 
Descartes concluded that those processes which go on in the mind 
of man himself have a certainty of their own, that they can become 
the object of investigation in introspection. 

[[[INTROSPECTION AND THE LOSS OF COMMON SENSE]]]

Introspection, as a matter of fact, not the reflection of man’s mind 
on the state of his soul or body but the sheer cognitive concern of 
consciousness with its own content (and this is the essence of the 
Cartesian cogitatio, where cogito always means cogito me cogitare ) 
must yield certainty, because here nothing is involved except what 
the mind has produced itself; nobody is interfering but the producer 
of the product, man is confronted with nothing and nobody but 
himself. Long before the natural and physical sciences began to 
wonder if man is capable of encountering, knowing, and compre- 
hending anything except himself, modern philosophy had made 
sure in introspection that man concerns himself only with himself. 
Descartes believed that the certainty yielded by his new method of 
introspection is the certainty of the I-am . Man, in other words, 
carries his certainty, the certainty of his existence, within himself; 
the sheer functioning of consciousness, though it cannot possibly 
assure a worldly reality given to the senses and to reason, confirms 
beyond doubt the reality of sensations and of reasoning, that is, the 
reality of processes which go on in the mind. These are not unlike 

[ 280 ]

the biological processes that go on in the body and which, when 
one becomes aware of them, can also convince one of its working 
reality. In so far as even dreams are real, since they presuppose a 
dreamer and a dream, the world of consciousness is real enough. 
The trouble is only that just as it would be impossible to infer from 
the awareness of bodily processes the actual shape of any body, in- 
cluding one’s own, so it is impossible to reach out from the mere 
consciousness of sensations, in which one senses his senses and in 
which even the sensed object becomes part of sensation, into reality 
with its shapes, forms, colors, and constellations. The seen tree 
may be real enough for the sensation of vision, just as the dreamed 
tree is real enough for the dreamer as long as the dream lasts, but 
neither can ever become a real tree. 

It is out of these perplexities that Descartes and Leibniz needed 
to prove, not the existence of God, but his goodness, the one dem- 
onstrating that no evil spirit rules the world and mocks man and 
the other that this world, including man, is the best of all possible 
worlds. The point about these exclusively modern justifications, 
known since Leibniz as theodicies, is that the doubt does not con- 
cern the existence of a highest being, which, on the contrary, is 
taken for granted, but concerns his revelation, as given in biblical 
tradition, and his intentions with respect to man and world, or 
rather the adequateness of the relationship between man and world. 
Of these two, the doubt that the Bible or nature contains divine 
revelation is a matter of course, once it has been shown that revela- 
tion as such, the disclosure of reality to the senses and of truth to 
reason, is no guaranty for either. Doubt of the goodness of God, 
however, the notion of a Dieu trompeur , arose out of the very ex- 
perience of deception inherent in the acceptance of the new world 
view, a deception whose poignancy lies in its irremediable repeti- 
tiveness, for no knowledge about the heliocentric nature of our 
planetary system can change the fact that every day the sun is seen 
circling the earth, rising and setting at its preordained location. 
Only now, when it appeared as though man, if it had not been for 
the accident of the telescope, might have been deceived forever, 
did the ways of God really become wholly inscrutable; the more 
man learned about the universe, the less he could understand the 
intentions and purposes for which he should have been created. 

[ 281 ] 

The goodness of the God of the theodicies, therefore, is strictly the 
quality of a deus ex machina ; inexplicable goodness is ultimately the 
only thing that saves reality in Descartes’ philosophy (the co- 
existence of mind and extension, res cogitans and res extensd), as it 
saves the prestabilized harmony between man and world in Leib- 
niz.

The very ingenuity of Cartesian introspection, and hence the 
reason why this philosophy became so all-important to the spiritual 
and intellectual development of the modern age, lies first in that it 
had used the nightmare of non-reality as a means of submerging all 
worldly objects into the stream of consciousness and its processes. 
The “seen tree” found in consciousness through introspection is no 
longer the tree given in sight and touch, an entity in itself with an 
unalterable identical shape of its own. By being processed into an 
object of consciousness on the same level with a merely remem- 
bered or entirely imaginary thing, it becomes part and parcel of 
this process itself, of that consciousness, that is, which one knows 
only as an ever-moving stream. Nothing perhaps could prepare our 
minds better for the eventual dissolution of matter into energy, of 
objects into a whirl of atomic occurrences, than this dissolution of 
objective reality into subjective states of mind or, rather, into sub- 
jective mental processes. Second, and this was of even greater 
relevance to the initial stages of the modern age, the Cartesian 
method of securing certainty against universal doubt corresponded 
most precisely to the most obvious conclusion to be drawn from 
the new physical science: though one cannot know truth as some- 
thing given and disclosed, man can at least know what he makes 
himself. This, indeed, became the most general and most generally 
accepted attitude of the modern age, and it is this conviction, rather 

[ 252 ] 

than the doubt underlying it, that propelled one generation after 
another for more than three hundred years into an ever-quickening 
pace of discovery and development. 

Cartesian reason is entirely based “on the implicit assumption 
that the mind can only know that which it has itself produced and 
retains in some sense within itself .” Its highest ideal must there- 
fore be mathematical knowledge as the modern age understands it, 
that is, not the knowledge of ideal forms given outside the mind 
but of forms produced by a mind which in this particular instance 
does not even need the stimulation — or, rather, the irritation — of 
the senses by objects other than itself. This theory is certainly 
what Whitehead calls it, “the outcome of common-sense in re- 
treat .” For common sense, which once had been the one by which 
all other senses, with their intimately private sensations, were 
fitted into the common world, just as vision fitted man into the 
visible world, now became an inner faculty without any world re- 
lationship. This sense now was called common merely because it 
happened to be common to all. What men now have in common is 
not the world but the structure of their minds, and this they cannot 
have in common, strictly speaking; their faculty of reasoning can 
only happen to be the same in everybody. The fact that, given the 
problem of two plus two we all will come out with the same answer, 
four, is henceforth the very model of common-sense reasoning. 

Reason, in Descartes no less than in Hobbes, becomes “reckon- 
ing with consequences,” the faculty of deducing and concluding, 
that is, of a process which man at any moment can let loose within 
himself. The mind of this man — to remain in the sphere of mathe- 
matics — no longer looks upon “two-and-two-are-four” as an equa- 
tion in which two sides balance in a self-evident harmony, but un- 
derstands the equation as the expression of a process in which two 
and two become four in order to generate further processes of addi- 

[ 283 ] 


tion which eventually will lead into the infinite. This faculty the 
modern age calls common-sense reasoning; it is the playing of the 
mind with itself, which comes to pass when the mind is shut off 
from all reality and “senses” only itself. The results of this play 
are compelling “truths” because the structure of one man’s mind is 
supposed to differ no more from that of another than the shape of 
his body. Whatever difference there may be is a difference of 
mental power, which can be tested and measured like horsepower. 
Here the old definition of man as an animal rationale acquires a ter- 
rible precision: deprived of the sense through which man’s five 
animal senses are fitted into a world common to all men, human 
beings are indeed no more than animals who are able to reason, “to 
reckon with consequences.” 

The perplexity inherent in the discovery of the Archimedean 
point was and still is that the point outside the earth was found by 
an earth-bound creature, who found that he himself lived not only 
in a different but in a topsy-turvy world the moment he tried to 
apply his universal world view to his actual surroundings. The 
Cartesian solution of this perplexity was to move the Archimedean 
point into man himself, to choose as ultimate point of reference 
the pattern of the human mind itself, which assures itself of reality 
and certainty within a framework of mathematical formulas which 
are its own products. Here the famous reductio scientiae ad mathe- 
maticam permits replacement of what is sensuously given by a sys- 
tem of mathematical equations where all real relationships are dis- 
solved into logical relations between man-made symbols. It is this 
replacement which permits modern science to fulfil its “task of 
■producing' the phenomena and objects it wishes to observe . And 
the assumption is that neither God nor an evil spirit can change the 
fact that two and two equal four. 

[ 284 ]

[[[THOUGHT AND THE MODERN WORLD VIEW]]]

The Cartesian removal of the Archimedean point into the mind of 
man, while it enabled man to carry it, as it were, within himself 
wherever he went and thus freed him from given reality altogether 
— that is, from the human condition of being an inhabitant of the 
earth— has perhaps never been as convincing as the universal doubt 
from which it sprang and which it was supposed to dispel. Today, 
at any rate, we find in the perplexities confronting natural scientists 
in the midst of their greatest triumphs the same nightmares which 
have haunted the philosophers from the beginning of the modern 
age. This nightmare is present in the fact that a mathematical 
equation, such as of mass and energy— which originally was des- 
tined only to save the phenomena, to be in agreement with observ- 
able facts that could also be explained differently, just as the 
Ptolemaic and Copernican systems originally differed only in sim- 
plicity and harmony — actually lends itself to a very real conversion 
of mass into energy and vice versa, so that the mathematical “con- 
version” implicit in every equation corresponds to convertibility in 
reality; it is present in the weird phenomenon that the systems of 
non-Euclidean mathematics were found without any forethought of 
applicability or even empirical meaning before they gained their 
surprising validity in Einstein’s theory; and it is even more trou- 
bling in the inevitable conclusion that “the possibility of such an 
application must be held open for all, even the most remote con- 
structions of pure mathematics.” If it should be true that a whole 
universe, or rather any number of utterly different universes will 
spring into existence and “prove” whatever over-all pattern the 

[ 28 ! ] 

human mind has constructed, then man may indeed, for a moment, 
rejoice in a reassertion of the “pre-established harmony between 
pure mathematics and physics ,” between mind and matter, be- 
tween man and the universe. But it will be difficult to ward off the 
suspicion that this mathematically preconceived world may be a 
dream world where every dreamed vision man himself produces 
has the character of reality only as long as the dream lasts. And his 
suspicions will be enforced when he must discover that the events 
and occurrences in the infinitely small, the atom, follow the same 
laws and regularities as in the infinitely large, the planetary sys- 
tems. What this seems to indicate is that if we inquire into nature 
from the standpoint of astronomy we receive planetary systems, 
while if we carry out our astronomical inquiries from the stand- 
point of the earth we receive geocentric, terrestrial systems. 

In any event, wherever we try to transcend appearance beyond 
all sensual experience, even instrument-aided, in order to catch the 
ultimate secrets of Being, which according to our physical world 
view is so secretive that it never appears and still so tremendously 
powerful that it produces all appearance, we find that the same 
patterns rule the macrocosm and the microcosm alike, that we 
receive the same instrument readings. Here again, we may for a 
moment rejoice in a refound unity of the universe, only to fall prey 
to the suspicion that what we have found may have nothing to do 
with either the macrocosmos or the microcosmos, that we deal 
only with the patterns of our own mind, the mind which designed 
the instruments and put nature under its conditions in the experi- 
ment-prescribed its laws to nature, in Kant’s phrase— in which 
case it is really as though we were in the hands of an evil spirit who 

[ 286 ] 



mocks us and frustrates our thirst for knowledge, so that wherever 
we search for that which we are not, we encounter only the pat- 
terns of our own minds. 

Cartesian doubt, logically the most plausible and chronologically 
the most immediate consequence of Galileo’s discovery, was as- 
suaged for centuries through the ingenious removal of the Archi- 
medean point into man himself, at least so far as natural science 
was concerned. But the mathematization of physics, by which the 
absolute renunciation of the senses for the purpose of knowing was 
carried through, had in its last stages the unexpected and yet 
plausible consequence that every question man puts to nature is 
answered in terms of mathematical patterns to which no model can 
ever be adequate, since one would have to be shaped after our sense 
experiences . At this point, the connection between thought and 
sense experience, inherent in the human condition, seems to take 
its revenge: while technology demonstrates the “truth” of modern 
science’s most abstract concepts, it demonstrates no more than 
that man can always apply the results of his mind, that no matter 
which system he uses for the explanation of natural phenomena he 
will always be able to adopt it as a guiding principle for making and 
acting. This possibility was latent even in the beginnings of modern 
mathematics, when it turned out that numerical truths can be fully 
translated into spatial relationships. If, therefore, present-day sci- 
ence in its perplexity points to technical achievements to “prove” 
that we deal with an “authentic order” given in nature , it seems it 
has fallen into a vicious circle, which can be formulated as follows: 
scientists formulate their hypotheses to arrange their experiments 
and then use these experiments to verify their hypotheses; during 
this whole enterprise, they obviously deal with a hypothetical 
nature .

[ 287 ] 

In other words, the world of the experiment seems always 
capable of becoming a man-made reality, and this, while it may 
increase man’s power of making and acting, even of creating a 
world, far beyond what any previous age dared to imagine in dream 
and phantasy, unfortunately puts man back once more — and now 
even more forcefully — into the prison of his own mind, into the 
limitations of patterns he himself created. The moment he wants 
what all ages before him were capable of achieving, that is, to ex- 
perience the reality of what he himself is not, he will find that 
nature and the universe “escape him” and that a universe construed 
according to the behavior of nature in the experiment and in ac- 
cordance with the very principles which man can translate techni- 
cally into a working reality lacks all possible representation. What 
is new here is not that things exist of which we cannot form an 
image — such “things” were always known and among them, for 
instance, belonged the “soul” — but that the material things we see 
and represent and against which we had measured immaterial 
things for which we can form no images should likewise be “unim- 
aginable.” With the disappearance of the sensually given world, 
the transcendent world disappears as well, and with it the possibil- 
ity of transcending the material world in concept and thought. 
It is therefore not surprising that the new universe is not only 
“practically inaccessible but not even thinkable,” for “however 
we think it, it is wrong; not perhaps quite as meaningless as a 
‘triangular circle,’ but much more so than a ‘winged lion.’ ” 

Cartesian universal doubt has now reached the heart of physical 

[ 288 ]

science itself; for the escape into the mind of man himself is closed 
if it turns out that the modern physical universe is not only beyond 
presentation, which is a matter of course under the assumption that 
nature and Being do not reveal themselves to the senses, but is 
inconceivable, unthinkable in terms of pure reasoning as well. 

[[[THE REVERSAL OF CONTEMPLATION AND ACTION]]]

Perhaps the most momentous of the spiritual consequences of the 
discoveries of the modern age and, at the same time, the only one 
that could not have been avoided, since it followed closely upon the 
discovery of the Archimedean point and the concomitant rise of 
Cartesian doubt, has been the reversal of the hierarchical order 
between the vita contemplativa and the vita activa. 

In order to understand how compelling the motives for this re- 
versal were, it is first of all necessary to rid ourselves of the cur- 
rent prejudice which ascribes the development of modern science, 
because of its applicability, to a pragmatic desire to improve condi- 
tions and better human life on earth. It is a matter of historical 
record that modern technology has its origins not in the evolution 
of those tools man had always devised for the twofold purpose of 
easing his labors and erecting the human artifice, but exclusively in 
an altogether non-practical search for useless knowledge. Thus, 
the watch, one of the first modern instruments, was not invented 
for purposes of practical life, but exclusively for the highly “theo- 
retical” purpose of conducting certain experiments with nature. 
This invention, to be sure, once its practical usefulness became 
apparent, changed the whole rhythm and the very physiognomy of 
human life; but from the standpoint of the inventors, this was a 
mere incident. If we had to rely only on men’s so-called practical 
instincts, there would never have been any technology to speak of, 
and although today the already existing technical inventions carry 
a certain momentum which will probably generate improvements 
up to a certain point, it is not likely that our technically conditioned 
world could survive, let alone develop further, if we ever succeeded 
in convincing ourselves that man is primarily a practical being. 

[ 289 ] 

However that may be, the fundamental experience behind the 
reversal of contemplation and action was precisely that man’s 
thirst for knowledge could be assuaged only after he had put his 
trust into the ingenuity of his hands. The point was not that truth 
and knowledge were no longer important, but that they could be 
won only by “action” and not by contemplation. It was an instru- 
ment, the telescope, a work of man’s hands, which finally forced 
nature, or rather the universe, to yield its secrets. The reasons for 
trusting doing and for distrusting contemplation or observation be- 
came even more cogent after the results of the first active inquiries. 
After being and appearance had parted company and truth was no 
longer supposed to appear, to reveal and disclose itself to the 
mental eye of a beholder, there arose a veritable necessity to hunt 
for truth behind deceptive appearances. Nothing indeed could be 
less trustworthy for acquiring knowledge and approaching truth 
than passive observation or mere contemplation. In order to be cer- 
tain one had to make sure , and in order to know one had to do. Cer- 
tainty of knowledge could be reached only under a twofold condi- 
tion: first, that knowledge concerned only what one had done him- 
self — so that its ideal became mathematical knowledge, where we 
deal only with self-made entities of the mind — and second, that 
knowledge was of such a nature that it could be tested only 
through more doing. 

Since then, scientific and philosophic truth have parted company; 
scientific truth not only need not be eternal, it need not even be 
comprehensible or adequate to human reason. It took many genera- 
tions of scientists before the human mind grew bold enough to fully 
face this implication of modernity. If nature and the universe are 
products of a divine maker, and if the human mind is incapable of 
understanding what man has not made himself, then man cannot 
possibly expect to learn anything about nature that he can under- 
stand. He may be able, through ingenuity, to find out and even to 
imitate the devices of natural processes, but that does not mean 
these devices will ever make sense to him — they do not have to be 
intelligible. As a matter of fact, no supposedly suprarational divine 
revelation and no supposedly abstruse philosophic truth has ever 
offended human reason so glaringly as certain results of modern 
science. One can indeed say with Whitehead: “Heaven knows 

[ 290 ] 

what seeming nonsense may not to-morrow be demonstrated 
truth .”

Actually, the change that took place in the seventeenth century 
was more radical than what a simple reversal of the established 
traditional order between contemplation and doing is apt to indi- 
cate. The reversal, strictly speaking, concerned only the relation- 
ship between thinking and doing, whereas contemplation, in the 
original sense of beholding the truth, was altogether eliminated. 
For thought and contemplation are not the same. Traditionally, 
thought was conceived as the most direct and important way to 
lead to the contemplation of truth. Since Plato, and probably since 
Socrates, thinking was understood as the inner dialogue in which 
one speaks with himself (eme emauto, to recall the idiom current in 
Plato’s dialogues); and although this dialogue lacks all outward 
manifestation and even requires a more or less complete cessation 
of all other activities, it constitutes in itself a highly active state. 
Its outward inactivity is clearly separated from the passivity, the 
complete stillness, in which truth is finally revealed to man. If 
medieval scholasticism looked upon philosophy as the handmaiden 
of theology, it could very well have appealed to Plato and Aris- 
totle themselves; both, albeit in a very different context, consid- 
ered this dialogical thought process to be the way to prepare the 
soul and lead the mind to a beholding of truth beyond thought and 
beyond speech — a truth that is arrheton, incapable of being com- 
municated through words, as Plato put it, or beyond speech, as in 
Aristotle. 

The reversal of the modern age consisted then not in raising 
doing to the rank of contemplating as the highest state of which 
human beings are capable, as though henceforth doing was the ulti- 
mate meaning for the sake of which contemplation was to be per- 
formed, just as, up to that time, all activities of the vita activa had 
been judged and justified to the extent that they made the vita con- 

[ 291 ]

templativa possible. The reversal concerned only thinking, which 
from then on was the handmaiden of doing as it had been the ancilla 
theologiae, the handmaiden of contemplating divine truth in medie- 
val philosophy and the handmaiden of contemplating the truth of 
Being in ancient philosophy. Contemplation itself became alto- 
gether meaningless. 

The radicality of this reversal is somehow obscured by another 
kind of reversal, with which it is frequently identified and which, 
since Plato, has dominated the history of Western thought. Who- 
ever reads the Cave allegory in Plato’s Republic in the light of 
Greek history will soon be aware that the periagoge, the turning- 
about that Plato demands of the philosopher, actually amounts to a 
reversal of the Homeric world order. Not life after death, as in the 
Homeric Hades, but ordinary life on earth, is located in a “cave,” 
in an underworld; the soul is not the shadow of the body, but the 
body the shadow of the soul; and the senseless, ghostlike motion 
ascribed by Homer to the lifeless existence of the soul after death 
in Hades is now ascribed to the senseless doings of men who do 
not leave the cave of human existence to behold the eternal ideas 
visible in the sky.

In this context, I am concerned only with the fact that the Pla- 
tonic tradition of philosophical as well as political thought started 
with a reversal, and that this original reversal determined to a large 
extent the thought patterns into which Western philosophy almost 
automatically fell wherever it was not animated by a great and 
original philosophical impetus. Academic philosophy, as a matter 
of fact, has ever since been dominated by the never-ending rever- 
sals of idealism and materialism, of transcendentalism and im- 
manentism, of realism and nominalism, of hedonism and asceticism, 
and so on. What matters here is the reversibility of all these sys- 
tems, that they can be turned “upside down” or “downside up” 
at any moment in history without requiring for such reversal either 
historical events or changes in the structural elements involved. 
The concepts themselves remain the same no matter where they 

[ 292 ] 

are placed in the various systematic orders. Once Plato had suc- 
ceeded in making these structural elements and concepts reversible, 
reversals within the course of intellectual history no longer needed 
more than purely intellectual experience, an experience within the 
framework of conceptual thinking itself. These reversals already 
began with the philosophical schools in late antiquity and have re- 
mained part of the Western tradition. It is still the same tradition, 
the same intellectual game with paired antitheses that rules, to an 
extent, the famous modern reversals of spiritual hierarchies, such 
as Marx’s turning Hegelian dialectic upside down or Nietzsche’s 
revaluation of the sensual and natural as against the supersensual 
and supernatural. 

The reversal we deal with here, the spiritual consequence of 
Galileo’s discoveries, although it has frequently been interpreted 
in terms of the traditional reversals and hence as integral to the 
Western history of ideas, is of an altogether different nature. The 
conviction that objective truth is not given to man but that he can 
know only what he makes himself is not the result of skepticism 
but of a demonstrable discovery, and therefore does not lead to 
resignation but either to iv doubled activity or to despair. The 
world loss of modern philosophy, whose introspection discovered 
consciousness as the inner sense with which one senses his senses 
and found it to be the only guaranty of reality, is different not only 
in degree from the age-old suspicion of the philosophers toward the 
world and toward the others with whom they shared the world; 
the philosopher no longer turns from the world of deceptive perish- 
ability to another world of eternal truth, but turns away from both 
and withdraws into himself. What he discovers in the region of the 
inner self is, again, not an image whose permanence can be beheld 
and contemplated, but, on the contrary, the constant movement of 
sensual perceptions and the no less constantly moving activity of 
the mind. Since the seventeenth century, philosophy has produced 
the best and least disputed results when it has investigated, through 
a supreme effort of self-inspection, the processes of the senses and 
of the mind. In this aspect, most of modern philosophy is indeed 
theory of cognition and psychology, and in the few instances where 
the potentialities of the Cartesian method of introspection were 
fully realized by men like Pascal, Kierkegaard, and Nietzsche, one 

[ 293 ] 




is tempted to say that philosophers have experimented with their 
own selves no less radically and perhaps even more fearlessly than 
the scientists experimented with nature. 

Much as we may admire the courage and respect the extraor- 
dinary ingenuity of philosophers throughout the modern age, it can 
hardly be denied that their influence and importance decreased as 
never before. It was not in the Middle Ages but in modern thinking 
that philosophy came to play second and even third fiddle. After 
Descartes based his own philosophy upon the discoveries of Gali- 
leo, philosophy has seemed condemned to be always one step be- 
hind the scientists and their ever more amazing discoveries, whose 
principles it has strived arduously to discover ex post facto and to fit 
into some over-all interpretation of the nature of human knowl- 
edge. As such, however, philosophy was not needed by the scien- 
tists, who — up to our time, at least — believed that they had no use 
for a handmaiden, let alone one who would “carry the torch in 
front of her gracious lady” (Kant). The philosophers became 
either epistemologists, worrying about an over-all theory of sci- 
ence which the scientists did not need, or they became, indeed, 
what Hegel wanted them to be, the organs of the Zeitgeist, the 
mouthpieces in which the general mood of the time was expressed 
with conceptual clarity. In both instances, whether they looked 
upon nature or upon history, they tried to understand and come to 
terms with what happened without them. Obviously, philosophy 
suffered more from modernity than any other field of human en- 
deavor; and it is difficult to say whether it suffered more from the 
almost automatic rise of activity to an altogether unexpected and 
unprecedented dignity or from the loss of traditional truth, that is, 
of the concept of truth underlying our whole tradition. 

[[[THE REVERSAL WITHIN THE VITA ACTIVA AND THE VICTORY OF HOMER FABER]]]

First among the activities within the vita activa to rise to the posi- 
tion formerly occupied by contemplation were the activities of 
making and fabricating — the prerogatives of homo faber. This was 

[ 294 ] 

natural enough, since it had been an instrument and therefore man 
in so far as he is a toolmaker that led to the modern revolution. 
From then on, all scientific progress has been most intimately tied 
up with the ever more refined development in the manufacture of 
new tools and instruments. While, for instance, Galileo’s experi- 
ments with the fall of heavy bodies could have been made at any 
time in history if men had been inclined to seek truth through ex- 
periments, Michelson’s experiment with the interferometer at the 
end of the nineteenth century relied not merely on his “experi- 
mental genius” but “required the general advance in technology,” 
and therefore “could not have been made earlier than it was.” 

It is not only the paraphernalia of instruments and hence the help 
man had to enlist from homofaber to acquire knowledge that caused 
these activities to rise from their former humble place in the 
hierarchy of human capacities. Even more decisive was the element 
of making and fabricating present in the experiment itself, which 
produces its own phenomena of observation and therefore depends 
from the very outset upon man’s productive capacities. The use of 
the experiment for the purpose of knowledge was already the con- 
sequence of the conviction that one can know only what he has 
made himself, for this conviction meant that one might learn about 
those things man did not make by figuring out and imitating the 
processes through which they had come into being. The much dis- 
cussed shift of emphasis in the history of science from the old ques- 
tions of “what” or “why” something is to the new question of 
“how” it came into being is a direct consequence of this convic- 
tion, and its answer can only be found in the experiment. The ex- 
periment repeats the natural process as though man himself were 
about to make nature’s objects, and although in the early stages of 
the modern age no responsible scientist would have dreamt of the 
extent to which man actually is capable of “making” nature, he 
nevertheless from the onset approached it from the standpoint of 
the One who made it, and this not for practical reasons of technical 
applicability but exclusively for the “theoretical” reason that cer- 
tainty in knowledge could not be gained otherwise: “Give me 
matter and I will build a world from it, that is, give me matter and 

[ 295 ] 

I will show you how a world developed from it.” These words of 
Kant show in a nutshell the modern blending of making and know- 
ing, whereby it is as though a few centuries of knowing in the mode 
of making were needed as the apprenticeship to prepare modern 
man for making what he wanted to know. 

Productivity and creativity, which were to become the highest 
ideals and even the idols of the modern age in its initial stages, are 
inherent standards of homofaber , of man as a builder and fabricator. 
However, there is another and perhaps even more significant ele- 
ment noticeable in the modern version of these faculties. The shift 
from the “why” and “what” to the “how” implies that the actual 
objects of knowledge can no longer be things or eternal motions 
but must be processes, and that the object of science therefore is no 
longer nature or the universe but the history, the story of the com- 
ing into being, of nature or life or the universe. Long before the 
modern age developed its unprecedented historical consciousness 
and the concept of history became dominant in modern philosophy, 
the natural sciences had developed into historical disciplines, until 
in the nineteenth century they added to the older disciplines of 
physics and chemistry, of zoology and botany, the new natural 
sciences of geology or history of the earth, biology or the history 
of life, anthropology or the history of human life, and, generally, 
natural history. In all these instances, development, the key con- 
cept of the historical sciences, became the central concept of the 
physical sciences as well. Nature, because it could be known only 
in processes which human ingenuity, the ingeniousness of homo 
faber, could repeat and remake in the experiment, became a proc- 
ess, and all particular natural things derived their significance and 
meaning solely from their functions in the over-all process. In the 
place of the concept of Being we now find the concept of Process. 
And whereas it is in the nature of Being to appear and thus disclose 

[ 25>6 ] 

itself, it is in the nature of Process to remain invisible, to be some- 
thing whose existence can only be inferred from the presence of 
certain phenomena. This process was originally the fabrication 
process which “disappears in the product,” and it was based on the 
experience of homo faber, who knew that a production process 
necessarily precedes the actual existence of every object. 

Yet while this insistence on the process of making or the insist- 
ence upon considering every thing as the result of a fabrication 
process is highly characteristic of homo faber and his sphere of ex- 
perience, the exclusive emphasis the modern age placed on it at the 
expense of all interest in the things, the products themselves, is 
quite new. It actually transcends the mentality of man as a tool- 
maker and fabricator, for whom, on the contrary, the production 
process was a mere means to an end. Here, from the standpoint of 
homo faber, it was as though the means, the production process or 
development, was more important than the end, the finished prod- 
uct. The reason for this shift of emphasis is obvious: the scientist 
made only in order to know, not in order to produce things, and the 
product was a mere by-product, a side effect. Even today all true 
scientists will agree that the technical applicability of what they 
are doing is a mere by-product of their endeavor. 

The full significance of this reversal of means and ends remained 
latent as long as the mechanistic world view, the world view of homo 
faber par excellence, was predominant. This view found its most 
plausible theory in the famous analogy of the relationship between 
nature and God with the relationship between the watch and the 
watchmaker. The point in our context is not so much that the 
eighteenth-century idea of God was obviously formed in the image 
of homo faber as that in this instance the process character of nature 
was still limited. Although all particular natural things had already 
been engulfed in the process from which they had come into being, 
nature as a whole was not yet a process but the more or less stable 
end product of a divine maker. The image of watch and watch- 
maker is so strikingly apposite precisely because it contains both 
the notion of a process character of nature in the image of the 
movements of the watch and the notion of its still intact object 
character in the image of the watch itself and its maker. 

It is important at this point to remember that the specifically 

[ 297 ]

modern suspicion toward man’s truth-receiving capacities, the mis- 
trust of the given, and hence the new confidence in making and 
introspection which was inspired by the hope that in human con- 
sciousness there was a realm where knowing and producing would 
coincide, did not arise directly from the discovery of the Archime- 
dean point outside the earth in the universe. They were, rather, the 
necessary consequences of this discovery for the discoverer him- 
self, in so far as he was and remained an earth-bound creature. 
This close relationship of the modern mentality with philosophical 
reflection naturally implies that the victory of homo faber could not 
remain restricted to the employment of new methods in the natural 
sciences, the experiment and the mathematization of scientific in- 
quiry. One of the most plausible consequences to be drawn from 
Cartesian doubt was to abandon the attempt to understand nature 
and generally to know about things not produced by man, and to 
turn instead exclusively to things that owed their existence to man. 
This kind of argument, in fact, made Vico turn his attention from 
natural science to history, which he thought to be the only sphere 
where man could obtain certain knowledge, precisely because he 
dealt here only with the products of human activity. The modern 
discovery of history and historical consciousness owed one of its 
greatest impulses neither to a new enthusiasm for the greatness of 
man, his doings and sufferings, nor to the belief that the meaning of 
human existence can be found in the story of mankind, but to the 


[ 298 ] 


despair of human reason, which seemed adequate only when con- 
fronted with man-made objects. 

Prior to the modern discovery of history but closely connected 
with it in its impulses are the seventeenth-century attempts to 
formulate new political philosophies or, rather, to invent the means 
and instruments with which to “make an artificial animal . . . 
called a Commonwealth, or State .” With Hobbes as with Des- 
cartes “the prime mover was doubt ,” and the chosen method to 
establish the “art of man,” by which he would make and rule his 
own world as “God hath made and governs the world” by the art 
of nature, is also introspection, “to read in himself,” since this 
reading will show him “the similitude of the thoughts and passions 
of one man to the thoughts and passions of another.” Here, too, the 
rules and standards by which to build and judge this most human of 
human “works of art” do not lie outside of men, are not some- 
thing men have in common in a worldly reality perceived by the 
senses or by the mind. They are, rather, inclosed in the inwardness 
of man, open only to introspection, so that their very validity rests 
on the assumption that “not . . . the objects of the passions” but 
the passions themselves are the same in every specimen of the spe- 
cies man-kind Here again we find the image of the watch, this 
time applied to the human body and then used for the movements 
of the passions. The establishment of the Commonwealth, the 
human creation of “an artificial man,” amounts to the building of 
an “automaton [an engine] that moves [itself] by springs and 
wheels as doth a watch.” 

In other words, the process which, as we saw, invaded the natu- 
ral sciences through the experiment, through the attempt to imitate 
under artificial conditions the process of “making” by which a 
natural thing came into existence, serves as well or even better as 
the principle for doing in the realm of human affairs. For here the 
processes of inner life, found in the passions through introspection, 
can become the standards and rules for the creation of the “auto- 


[ 299 ] 

made” life of that “artificial man” who is “the great Leviathan.” 
The results yielded by introspection, the only method likely to 
deliver certain knowledge, are in the nature of movements: only 
the objects of the senses remain as they are and endure, precede 
and survive, the act of sensation; only the objects of the passions 
are permanent and fixed to the extent that they are not devoured by 
the attainment of some passionate desire; only the objects of 
thoughts, but never thinking itself, are beyond motion and perish- 
ability. Processes, therefore, and not ideas, the models and shapes 
of the things to be, become the guide for the making and fabricating 
activities of homo faber in the modem age. 

Hobbes’s attempt to introduce the new concepts of making and 
reckoning into political philosophy— or, rather, his attempt to 
apply the newly discovered aptitudes of making to the realm of 
human affairs — was of the greatest importance; modern rational- 
ism as it is currently known, with the assumed antagonism of rea- 
son and passion as its stock-in-trade, has never found a clearer and 
more uncompromising representative. Yet it was precisely the 
realm of human affairs where the new philosophy was first found 
wanting, because by its very nature it could not understand or even 
believe in reality. The idea that only what I am going to make will 
be real — perfectly true and legitimate in the realm of fabrication — 
is forever defeated by the actual course of events, where nothing 
happens more frequently than the totally unexpected. To act in the 
form of making, to reason in the form of “reckoning with conse- 
quences,” means to leave out the unexpected, the event itself, since 
it would be unreasonable or irrational to expect what is no more 
than an “infinite improbability.” Since, however, the event con- 
stitutes the very texture of reality within the realm of human af- 
fairs, where the “wholly improbable happens regularly,” it is 
highly unrealistic not to reckon with it, that is, not to reckon with 
something with which nobody can safely reckon. The political 
philosophy of the modern age, whose greatest representative is still 
Hobbes, founders on the perplexity that modern rationalism is 
unreal and modern realism is irrational — which is only another way 
of saying that reality and human reason have parted company. 
Hegel’s gigantic enterprise to reconcile spirit with reality ( den 
Geist mit der Wirklichkeit zu versohnen ), a reconciliation that is the 

[ 300 ] 

deepest concern of all modern theories of history, rested on the 
insight that modern reason foundered on the rock of reality. 

The fact that modem world alienation was radical enough to 
extend even to the most worldly of human activities, to work and 
reification, the making of things and the building of a world, dis- 
tinguishes modern attitudes and evaluations even more sharply 
from those of tradition than a mere reversal of contemplation and 
action, of thinking and doing, would indicate. The break with con- 
templation was consummated not with the elevation of man the 
maker to the position formerly held by man the contemplator, but 
with the introduction of the concept of process into making. Com- 
pared with this, the striking new arrangement of hierarchical order 
within the vita activa , where fabrication now came to occupy a rank 
formerly held by political action, is of minor importance. We saw 
before that this hierarchy had in fact, though not expressly, already 
been overruled in the very beginnings of political philosophy by 
the philosophers’ deep-rooted suspicion of politics in general and 
action in particular. 

The matter is somewhat confused because Greek political phi- 
losophy still follows the order laid down by the polis even when it 
turns against it; but in their strictly philosophical writings (to 
which, of course, one must turn if he wants to know their inner- 
most thoughts), Plato as well as Aristotle tends to invert the rela- 
tionship between work and action in favor of work. Thus Aris- 
totle, in a discussion of the different kinds of cognition in his 
Metaphysics , places dianoia and episteme praktike, practical insight 
and political science, at the lowest rank of his order, and puts 
above them the science of fabrication, episteme poietike, which im- 
mediately precedes and leads to thedria, the contemplation of 
truth. And the reason for this predilection in philosophy is by no 
means the politically inspired suspicion of action which we men- 
tioned before, but the philosophically much more compelling one 
that contemplation and fabrication ( thedria and poiesis ) have an 
inner affinity and do not stand in the same unequivocal opposition 
to each other as contemplation and action. The decisive point of 
similarity, at least in Greek philosophy, was that contemplation, 
the beholding of something, was considered to be an inherent ele- 

[ 301 ] 

ment in fabrication as well, inasmuch as the work of the craftsman 
was guided by the “idea,” the model beheld by him before the 
fabrication process had started as well as after it had ended, first 
to tell him what to make and then to enable him to judge the 
finished product. 

Historically, the source of this contemplation, which we find for 
the first time described in the Socratic school, is at least twofold. 
On one hand, it stands in obvious and consistent connection with 
the famous contention of Plato, quoted by Aristotle, that thauma- 
zein, the shocked wonder at the miracle of Being, is the beginning 
of all philosophy. It seems to me highly probable that this Pla- 
tonic contention is the immediate result of an experience, perhaps 
the most striking one, that Socrates offered his disciples: the sight 
of him time and again suddenly overcome by his thoughts and 
thrown into a state of absorption to the point of perfect motionless- 
ness for many hours. It seems no less plausible that this shocked 
wonder should be essentially speechless, that is, that its actual con- 
tent should be untranslatable into words. This, at least, would ex- 
plain why Plato and Aristotle, who held thaumazein to be the be- 
ginning of philosophy, should also agree — despite so many and 
such decisive disagreements — that some state of speechlessness, 
the essentially speechless state of contemplation, was the end of 
philosophy. Thedria, in fact, is only another word for thaumazein; 
the contemplation of truth at which the philosopher ultimately ar- 
rives is the philosophically purified speechless wonder with which 
he began. 

There is, however, another side to this matter, which shows it- 
self most articulately in Plato’s doctrine of ideas, in its content as 
well as in its terminology and exemplifications. These reside in the 
experiences of the craftsman, who sees before his inner eye the 
shape of the model according to which he fabricates his object. To 

[ 302 ] 

Plato, this model, which craftsmanship can only imitate but not 
create, is no product of the human mind but given to it. As such it 
possesses a degree of permanence and excellence which is not ac- 
tualized but on the contrary spoiled in its materialization through 
the work of human hands. Work makes perishable and spoils the 
excellence of what remained eternal so long as it was the object of 
mere contemplation. Therefore, the proper attitude toward the 
models which guide work and fabrication, that is, toward Platonic 
ideas, is to leave them as they are and appear to the inner eye of the 
mind. If man only renounces his capacity for work and does not do 
anything, he can behold them and thus participate in their eternity. 
Contemplation, in this respect, is quite unlike the enraptured state 
of wonder with which man responds to the miracle of Being as a 
whole. It is and remains part and parcel of a fabrication process 
even though it has divorced itself from all work and all doing; in it, 
the beholding of the model, which now no longer is to guide any 
doing, is prolonged and enjoyed for its own sake. 

In the tradition of philosophy, it is this second kind of contem- 
plation that became the predominant one. Therefore the motion- 
lessness which in the state of speechless wonder is no more than an 
incidental, unintended result of absorption, becomes now the con- 
dition and hence the outstanding characteristic of the vita con- 
templativa. It is not wonder that overcomes and throws man into 
motionlessness, but it is through the conscious cessation of activ- 
ity, the activity of making, that the contemplative state is reached. 
If one reads medieval sources on the joys and delights of contem- 
plation, it is as though the philosophers wanted to make sure that 
homo faber would heed the call and let his arms drop, finally realiz- 
ing that his greatest desire, the desire for permanence and immor- 
tality, cannot be fulfilled by his doings, but only when he realizes 
that the beautiful and eternal cannot be made. In Plato’s philoso- 
phy, speechless wonder, the beginning and the end of philosophy, 
together with the philosopher’s love for the eternal and the crafts- 
man’s desire for permanence and immortality, permeate each other 
until they are almost indistinguishable. Yet the very fact that the 
philosophers’ speechless wonder seemed to be an experience re- 
served for the few, while the craftsmen’s contemplative glance was 

[ 303 ] 

known by many, weighed heavily in favor of a contemplation pri- 
marily derived from the experiences of homo faber. It already 
weighed heavily with Plato, who drew his examples from the realm 
of making because they were closer to a more general human ex- 
perience, and it weighed even more heavily where some kind of 
contemplation and meditation was required of everybody, as in 
medieval Christianity. 

Thus it was not primarily the philosopher and philosophic 
speechless wonder that molded the concept and practice of con- 
templation and the vita contemplative but rather homo faber in dis- 
guise; it was man the maker and fabricator, whose job it is to do 
violence to nature in order to build a permanent home for himself, 
and who now was persuaded to renounce violence together with 
all activity, to leave things as they are, and to find his home in the 
contemplative dwelling in the neighborhood of the imperishable 
and eternal. Homo faber could be persuaded to this change of atti- 
tude because he knew contemplation and some of its delights from 
his own experience; he did not need a complete change of heart, a 
true periagoge, a radical turnabout. All he had to do was let his 
arms drop and prolong indefinitely the act of beholding the eidos, 
the eternal shape and model he had formerly wanted to imitate and 
whose excellence and beauty he now knew he could only spoil 
through any attempt at reification. 

If, therefore, the modern challenge to the priority of contempla- 
tion over every kind of activity had done no more than turn upside 
down the established order between making and beholding, it 
would still have remained in the traditional framework. This 
framework was forced wide open, however, when in the under- 
standing of fabrication itself the emphasis shifted entirely away 
from the product and from the permanent, guiding model to the 
fabrication process, away from the question of what a thing is and 
what kind of thing was to be produced to the question of how and 
through which means and processes it had come into being and 
could be reproduced. For this implied both that contemplation was 
no longer believed to yield truth and that it had lost its position in 
the vita activa itself and hence within the range of ordinary human 
experience. 


[ 304 ] 

[[[the defeat of Homo Faber and the PRINCIPLE OF HAPPINESS]]]

If one considers only the events that led into the modern age and 
reflects solely upon the immediate consequences of Galileo’s dis- 
covery, which must have struck the great minds of the seventeenth 
century with the compelling force of self-evident truth, the re- 
versal of contemplation and fabrication, or rather the elimination 
of contemplation from the range of meaningful human capacities, 
is almost a matter of course. It seems equally plausible that this 
reversal should have elevated homojaber , the maker and fabricator, 
rather than man the actor or man as animal laborans, to the highest 
range of human possibilities. 

And, indeed, among the outstanding characteristics of the mod- 
ern age from its beginning to our own time we find the typical atti- 
tudes of homo faber: his instrumentalization of the world, his con- 
fidence in tools and in the productivity of the maker of artificial 
objects; his trust in the all-comprehensive range of the means-end 
category, his conviction that every issue can be solved and every 
human motivation reduced to the principle of utility; his sover- 
eignty, which regards everything given as material and thinks of 
the whole of nature as of “an immense fabric from which we can 
cut out whatever we want to resew it however we like ”; his 
equation of intelligence with ingenuity, that is, his contempt for all 

[ m \ ]

thought which cannot be considered to be “the first step ... for 
the fabrication of artificial objects, particularly of tools to make 
tools, and to vary their fabrication indefinitely ”; finally, his 
matter-of-course identification of fabrication with action. 

It would lead us too far afield to follow the ramifications of this 
mentality, and it is not necessary, for they are easily detected in 
the natural sciences, where the purely theoretical effort is under- 
stood to spring from the desire to create order out of “mere dis- 
order,” the “wild variety of nature,” and where therefore homo 
faber' s predilection for patterns for things to be produced replaces 
the older notions of harmony and simplicity. It can be found in 
classical economics, whose highest standard is productivity and 
whose prejudice against non-productive activities is so strong that 
even Marx could justify his plea for justice for laborers only by 
misrepresenting the laboring, non-productive activity in terms of 
work and fabrication. It is most articulate, of course, in the prag- 
matic trends of modern philosophy, which are not only character- 
ized by Cartesian world alienation but also by the unanimity with 
which English philosophy from the seventeenth century onward 
and French philosophy in the eighteenth century adopted the prin- 
ciple of utility as the key which would open all doors to the ex- 
planation of human motivation and behavior. Generally speaking, 
the oldest conviction of hmno faber — that “man is the measure of 
all things” — advanced to the rank of a universally accepted com- 
monplace. 

What needs explanation is not the modern esteem of homo faber 
but the fact that this esteem was so quickly followed by the eleva- 
tion of laboring to the highest position in the hierarchical order of 
the vita activa. This second reversal of hierarchy within the vita 
activa came about more gradually and less dramatically than either 
the reversal of contemplation and action in general or the reversal 
of action and fabrication in particular. The elevation of laboring 
was preceded by certain deviations and variations from the tradi- 
tional mentality of homo faber which were highly characteristic of 
the modern age and which, indeed, arose almost automatically 
from the very nature of the events that ushered it in. What changed 

[ 306 ] 

the mentality of homo faber was the central position of the concept 
of process in modernity. As far as homo faber was concerned, the 
modern shift of emphasis from the “what" to the “how,” from the 
thing itself to its fabrication process, was by no means an unmixed 
blessing. It deprived man as maker and builder of those fixed and 
permanent standards and measurements which, prior to the modern 
age, have always served him as guides for his doing and criteria for 
his judgment. It is not only and perhaps not even primarily the de- 
velopment of commercial society that, with the triumphal victory 
of exchange value over use value, first introduced the principle of 
interchangeability, then the relativization, and finally the devalua- 
tion, of all values. For the mentality of modern man, as it was de- 
termined by the development of modern science and the concomi- 
tant unfolding of modern philosophy, it was at least as decisive 
that man began to consider himself part and parcel of the two su- 
perhuman, all-encompassing processes of nature and history, both 
of which seemed doomed to an infinite progress without ever 
reaching any inherent telos or approaching any preordained idea. 

Homo faber, in other words, as he arose from the great revolution 
of modernity, though he was to acquire an undreamed-of ingenuity 
in devising instruments to measure the infinitely large and the in- 
finitely small, was deprived of those permanent measures that pre- 
cede and outlast the fabrication process and form an authentic and 
reliable absolute with respect to the fabricating activity. Certainly, 
none of the activities of the vita activa stood to lose as much through 
the elimination of contemplation from the range of meaningful hu- 
man capacities as fabrication. For unlike action, which partly con- 
sists in the unchaining of processes, and unlike laboring, which fol- 
lows closely the metabolic process of biological life, fabrication 
experiences processes, if it is aware of them at all, as mere means 
toward an end, that is, as something secondary and derivative. No 
other capacity, moreover, stood to lose as much through modern 
world alienation and the elevation of introspection into an omnip- 
otent device to conquer nature as those faculties which are pri- 
marily directed toward the building of the world and the produc- 
tion of worldly things. 

Nothing perhaps indicates clearer the ultimate failure of homo 
faber to assert himself than the rapidity with which the principle of 

[ 307 ] 


utility, the very quintessence of his world view, was found want- 
ing and was superseded by the principle of “the greatest happiness 
of the greatest number .” When this happened it was manifest 
that the conviction of the age that man can know only what he 
makes himself — which seemingly was so eminently propitious to a 
full victory of homo faber — would be overruled and eventually de- 
stroyed by the even more modern principle of process, whose con- 
cepts and categories are altogether alien to the needs and ideals of 
homo faber. For the principle of utility, though its point of reference 
is clearly man, who uses matter to produce things, still presup- 
poses a world of use objects by which man is surrounded and in 
which he moves. If this relationship between man and world is no 
longer secure, if worldly things are no longer primarily considered 
in their usefulness but as more or less incidental results of the pro- 
duction process which brought them into being, so that the end 
product of the production process is no longer a true end and the 
produced thing is valued not for the sake of its predetermined 
usage but “for its production of something else,” then, obviously, 
the objection can be “raised that ... its value is secondary only, 
and a world that contains no primary values can contain no second- 
ary ones either .” This radical loss of values within the restricted 

[ 308 ]

frame of reference of homo faber himself occurs almost automati- 
cally as soon as he defines himself not as the maker of objects and 
the builder of the human artifice who incidentally invents tools, 
but considers himself primarily a toolmaker and “particularly [a 
maker] of tools to make tools” who only incidentally also pro- 
duces things. If one applies the principle of utility in this context at 
all, then it refers primarily not to use objects and not to usage but 
to the production process. Now what helps stimulate productivity 
and lessens pain and effort is useful. In other words, the ultimate 
standard of measurement is not utility and usage at all, but “happi- 
ness,” that is, the amount of pain and pleasure experienced in the 
production or in the consumption of things. 

Bentham’s invention of the “pain and pleasure calculus” com- 
bined the advantage of seemingly introducing the mathematical 
method into the moral sciences with the even greater attraction of 
having found a principle which resided entirely on introspection. 
His “happiness,” the sum total of pleasures minus pains, is as much 
an inner sense which senses sensations and remains unrelated to 
worldly objects as the Cartesian consciousness that is conscious of 
its own activity. Moreover, Bentham’s basic assumption that what 
all men have in common is not the world but the sameness of their 
own nature, which manifests itself in the sameness of calculation 
and the sameness of being affected by pain and pleasure, is directly 
derived from the earlier philosophers of the modern age. For this 
philosophy, “hedonism” is even more of a misnomer than for the 
epicureanism of late antiquity, to which modern hedonism is only 
superficially related. The principle of all hedonism, as we saw 
before, is not pleasure but avoidance of pain, and Hume, who in 
contradistinction to Bentham was still a philosopher, knew quite 
well that he who wants to make pleasure the ultimate end of all 
human action is driven to admit that not pleasure but pain, not 
desire but fear, are his true guides. “If you . . . inquire, why 
[somebody] desires health, he will readily reply, because sickness 
is painful. If you push your inquiries further and desire a reason 
why he hates pain, it is impossible he can ever give any. This is an 
ultimate end, and is never referred to by any other object .” The 
reason for this impossibility is that only pain is completely inde- 

[ 309 ]

pendent of any object, that only one who is in pain really senses 
nothing but himself; pleasure does not enjoy itself but something 
besides itself. Pain is the only inner sense found by introspection 
which can rival in independence from experienced objects the self- 
evident certainty of logical and arithmetical reasoning. 

While this ultimate foundation of hedonism in the experience of 
pain is true for both its ancient and modern varieties, in the modern 
age it acquires an altogether different and much stronger emphasis. 
For here it is by no means the world, as in antiquity, that drives 
man into himself to escape the pains it may inflict, under which 
circumstance both pain and pleasure still retain a good deal of their 
worldly significance. Ancient world alienation in all its varieties — 
from stoicism to epicureanism down to hedonism and cynicism — 
had been inspired by a deep mistrust of the world and moved by a 
vehement impulse to withdraw from worldly involvement, from 
the trouble and pain it inflicts, into the security of an inward realm 
in which the self is exposed to nothing but itself. Their moderr 
counterparts — puritanism, sensualism, and Bentham’s hedonism — 
on the contrary, were inspired by an equally deep mistrust of man 
as such; they were moved by doubt of the adequacy of the human 
senses to receive reality, the adequacy of human reason to receive 
truth, and hence by the conviction of the deficiency or even deprav- 
ity of human nature. 

This depravity is not Christian or biblical either in origin or in 
content, although it was of course interpreted in terms of original 
sin, and it is difficult to say whether it is more harmful and repul- 
sive when puritans denounce man’s corruptness or when Bentham- 
ites brazenly hail as virtues what men always have known to be 
vices. While the ancients had relied upon imagination and memory, 
the imagination of pains from which they were free or the memory 
of past pleasures in situations of acute painfulness, to convince 
themselves of their happiness, the moderns needed the calculus of 
pleasure or the puritan moral bookkeeping of merits and transgres- 
sions to arrive at some illusory mathematical certainty of happiness 
or salvation. (These moral arithmetics are, of course, quite alien 
to the spirit pervading the philosophic schools of late antiquity. 
Moreover, one need only reflect on the rigidity of self-imposed 
discipline and the concomitant nobility of character, so manifest in 

[ 310 ] 


those who had been formed by ancient stoicism or epicureanism, to 
become aware of the gulf by which these versions of hedonism are 
separated from modern puritanism, sensualism, and hedonism. For 
this difference, it is almost irrelevant whether the modern character 
is still formed by the older narrow-minded, fanatic self-righteous- 
ness or has yielded to the more recent self-centered and self- 
indulgent egotism with its infinite variety of futile miseries.) It 
seems more than doubtful that the “greatest happiness principle” 
would have achieved its intellectual triumphs in the English-speak- 
ing world if no more had been involved than the questionable discov- 
ery that “nature has placed mankind under the governance of two 
sovereign masters, pain and pleasure,” or the absurd idea of estab- 
lishing morals as an exact science by isolating “in the human soul 
that feeling which seems to be the most easily measurable.”

Hidden behind this as behind other, less interesting variations of 
the sacredness of egoism and the all-pervasive power of self-inter- 
est, which were current to the point of being commonplace in the 
eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries, we find another point of 
reference which indeed forms a much more potent principle than 
any pain-pleasure calculus could ever offer, and that is the principle 
of life itself. What pain and pleasure, fear and desire, are actually 
supposed to achieve in all these systems is not happiness at all but 
the promotion of individual life or a guaranty of the survival of 
mankind. If modem egoism were the ruthless search for pleasure 
(called happiness) it pretends to be, it would not lack what in all 
truly hedonistic systems is an indispensable element of argumenta- 
tion — a radical justification of suicide. This lack alone indicates 
that in fact we deal here with life philosophy in its most vulgar and 
least critical form. In the last resort, it is always life itself which is 
the supreme standard to which everything else is referred, and the 

[ 311 ] 


interests of the individual as well as the interests of mankind are 
always equated with individual life or the life of the species as 
though it were a matter of course that life is the highest good. 

The curious failure of homo faber to assert himself under condi- 
tions seemingly so extraordinarily propitious could also have been 
illustrated by another, philosophically even more relevant, revision 
of basic traditional beliefs. Hume’s radical criticism of the causality 
principle, which prepared the way for the later adoption of the 
principle of evolution, has often been considered one of the origins 
of modern philosophy. The causality principle with its twofold 
central axiom — that everything that is must have a cause ( nihil sine 
causa) and that the cause must be more perfect than its most perfect 
effect — obviously relies entirely on experiences in the realm of 
fabrication, where the maker is superior to his products. Seen in 
this context, the turning point in the intellectual history of the 
modern age came when the image of organic life development— 
where the evolution of a lower being, for instance the ape, can 
cause the appearance of a higher being, for instance man — appeared 
in the place of the image of the watchmaker who must be superior 
to all watches whose cause he is. 

Much more is implied in this change than the mere denial of the 
lifeless rigidity of a mechanistic world view. It is as though in the 
latent seventeenth-century conflict between the two possible meth- 
ods to be derived from the Galilean discovery, the method of the 
experiment and of making on one hand and the method of introspec- 
tion on the other, the latter was to achieve a somewhat belated 
victory. For the only tangible object introspection yields, if it is to 
yield more than an entirely empty consciousness of itself, is indeed 
the biological process. And since this biological life, accessible in 
self-observation, is at the same time a metabolic process between 
man and nature, it is as though introspection no longer needs to get 
lost in the ramifications of a consciousness without reality, but has 
found within man — not in his mind but in his bodily processes — 
enough outside matter to connect him again with the outer world. 
The split between subject and object, inherent in human conscious- 
ness and irremediable in the Cartesian opposition of man as a res 
cogitans to a surrounding world of res extensae, disappears altogether 
in the case of a living organism, whose very survival depends upon 

[ 312 ] 


the incorporation, the consumption, of outside matter. Naturalism, 
the nineteenth-century version of materialism, seemed to find in 
life the way to solve the problems of Cartesian philosophy and at 
the same time to bridge the ever-widening chasm between philoso- 
phy and science.

[[[LIFE AS THE HIGHEST GOOD]]]

Tempting as it may be for the sake of sheer consistency to derive 
the modern life concept from the self-inflicted perplexities of mod- 
ern philosophy, it would be a delusion and a grave injustice to the 
seriousness of the problems of the modern age if one looked upon 
them merely from the viewpoint of the development of ideas. The 
defeat of homo faber may be explainable in terms of the initial trans- 
formation of physics into astrophysics, of natural sciences into a 
“universal” science. What still remains to be explained is why this 
defeat ended with a victory of the animal laborans; why, with the 
rise of the vita activa, it was precisely the laboring activity that was 
to be elevated to the highest rank of man’s capacities or, to put it 
another way, why within the diversity of the human condition 
with its various human capacities it was precisely life that over- 
ruled all other considerations. 

The reason why life asserted itself as the ultimate point of refer- 
ence in the modern age and has remained the highest good of mod- 

[ 313 ] 

ern society is that the modern reversal operated within the fabric 
of a Christian society whose fundamental belief in the sacredness of 
life has survived, and has even remained completely unshaken by, 
secularization and the general decline of the Christian faith. In 
other words, the modern reversal followed and left unchallenged 
the most important reversal with which Christianity had broken 
into the ancient world, a reversal that was politically even more 
far-reaching and, historically at any rate, more enduring than any 
specific dogmatic content or belief. For the Christian “glad tid- 
ings” of the immortality of individual human life had reversed the 
ancient relationship between man and world and promoted the most 
mortal thing, human life, to the position of immortality, which up 
to then the cosmos had held. 

Historically, it is more than probable that the victory of the 
Christian faith in the ancient world was largely due to this re- 
versal, which brought hope to those who knew that their world 
was doomed, indeed a hope beyond hope, since the new message 
promised an immortality they never had dared to hope for. This 
reversal could not but be disastrous for the esteem and the dignity 
of politics. Political activity, which up to then had derived its great- 
est inspiration from the aspiration toward worldly immortality, 
now sank to the low level of an activity subject to necessity, 
destined to remedy the consequences of human sinfulness on one 
hand and to cater to the legitimate wants and interests of earthly 
life on the other. Aspiration toward immortality could now only 
be equated with vainglory; such fame as the world could bestow 
upon man was an illusion, since the world was even more perish- 
able than man, and a striving for worldly immortality was mean- 
ingless, since life itself was immortal. 

It is precisely individual life which now came to occupy the 
position once held by the “life” of the body politic, and Paul’s 
statement that “death is the wages of sin,” since life is meant to 
last forever, echoes Cicero’s statement that death is the reward of 
sins committed by political communities which were built to last 
for eternity. It is as though the early Christians — at least Paul, 

[ 314 ] 

who after all was a Roman citizen — consciously shaped their con- 
cept of immortality after the Roman model, substituting individual 
life for the political life of the body politic. Just as the body politic 
possesses only a potential immortality which can be forfeited by 
political transgressions, individual life had once forfeited its guar- 
anteed immortality in Adam’s fall and now, through Christ, had 
regained a new, potentially everlasting life which, however, could 
again be lost in a second death through individual sin. 

Certainly, Christian emphasis on the sacredness of life is part 
and parcel of the Hebrew heritage, which already presented a strik- 
ing contrast to the attitudes of antiquity: the pagan contempt for 
the hardships which life imposes upon man in labor and giving birth, 
the envious picture of the “easy life” of the gods, the custom of 
exposing unwanted offspring, the conviction that life without 
health is not worth living (so that the physician, for instance, is 
held to have misunderstood his calling when he prolongs life where 
he cannot restore health )and that suicide is a noble gesture to 
escape a life that has become burdensome. Still, one need only re- 
member how the Decalogue enumerates the offense of murder, 
without any special emphasis, among a number of other transgres- 
sions — which to our way of thinking can hardly compete in gravity 
with this supreme crime — to realize that not even the Hebrew 
legal code, though much closer to our own than any pagan scale of 
offenses, made the preservation of life the cornerstone of the legal 
system of the Jewish people. This intermediary position which the 
Hebrew legal code occupies between pagan antiquity and all Chris- 
tian or post-Christian legal systems may be explicable by the 
Hebrew creed which stresses the potential immortality of the 
people, as distinguished from the pagan immortality of the world 
on one side and the Christian immortality of individual life on the 
other. At any event, this Christian immortality that is bestowed 
upon the person, who in his uniqueness begins life by birth on 
earth, resulted not only in the more obvious increase of other- 
worldliness, but also in an enormously increased importance of life 

[ 315 ] 

on earth. The point is that Christianity — except for heretical and 
gnostic speculations — always insisted that life, though it had no 
longer a final end, still has a definite beginning. Life on earth may 
be only the first and the most miserable stage of eternal life; it still 
is life, and without this life that will be terminated in death, there 
cannot be eternal life. This may be the reason for the undisputable 
fact that only when the immortality of individual life became the 
central creed of Western mankind, that is, only with the rise of 
Christianity, did life on earth also become the highest good of man. 

Christian emphasis on the sacredness of life tended to level out 
the ancient distinctions and articulations within the vita activa; it 
tended to view labor, work, and action as equally subject to the 
necessity of present life. At the same time it helped to free the 
laboring activity, that is, whatever is necessary to sustain the bio- 
logical process itself, from some of the contempt in which antiq- 
uity had held it. The old contempt toward the slave, who had been 
despised because he served only life’s necessities and submitted to 
the compulsion of his master because he wanted to stay alive at all 
costs, could not possibly survive in the Christian era. One could no 
longer with Plato despise the slave for not having committed sui- 
cide rather than submit to a master, for to stay alive under all cir- 
cumstances had become a holy duty, and suicide was regarded as 
worse than murder. Not the murderer, but he who had put an end 
to his own life was refused a Christian burial. 

Yet contrary to what some modern interpreters have tried to 
read into Christian sources, there are no indications of the modern 
glorification of laboring in the New Testament or in other pre- 
modern Christian writers. Paul, who has been called “the apostle 
of labor ,” was nothing of the sort, and the few passages on which 

[ 316 ] 

this claim is based either are addressed to those who out of laziness 
“ate other men’s bread” or they recommend labor as a good means 
to keep out of trouble, that is, they reinforce the general prescrip- 
tion of a strictly private life and warn of political activities. It is 
even more relevant that in later Christian philosophy, and particu- 
larly in Thomas Aquinas, labor had become a duty for those who 
had no other means to keep alive, the duty consisting in keeping 
one’s self alive and not in laboring; if one could provide for himself 
through beggary, so much the better. Whoever reads the sources 
without modern prolabor prejudices will be surprised at how little 
the church fathers availed themselves even of the obvious oppor- 
tunity to justify labor as punishment for original sin. Thus Thomas 
does not hesitate to follow Aristotle rather than the Bible in this 
question and to assert that “only the necessity to keep alive com- 
pels to do manual labor.” Labor to him is nature’s way of keeping 
the human species alive, and from this he concludes that it is by no 
means necessary that all men earn their bread by the sweat of their 
brows, but that this is rather a kind of last and desperate resort to 
solve the problem or fulfil the duty. Not even the use of labor as a 
means with which to ward off the dangers of otiosity is a new 
Christian discovery, but was already a commonplace of Roman 
morality. In complete agreement with ancient convictions about 
the character of the laboring activity, finally, is the frequent Chris- 
tian use for the mortification of the flesh, where labor, especially in 
the monasteries, sometimes played the same role as other painful 
exercises and forms of self-torture. 


[ m ]

The reason why Christianity, its insistence on the sacredness of 
life and on the duty to stay alive notwithstanding, never developed 
a positive labor philosophy lies in the unquestioned priority given 
to the vita contemplativa over all kinds of human activities. Vita 
contemplativct simpliciter melior est quam vita activa (“the life of con- 
templation is simply better than the life of action”), and what- 
ever the merits of an active life might be, those of a life devoted to 
contemplation are “more effective and more powerful .” This 
conviction, it is true, can hardly be found in the preachings of Jesus 
of Nazareth, and it is certainly due to the influence of Greek phi- 
losophy; yet even if medieval philosophy had kept closer to the 
spirit of the Gospels, it could hardly have found there any reason 
for a glorification of laboring . The only activity Jesus of Nazareth 
recommends in his preachings is action, and the only human capac- 
ity he stresses is the capacity “to perform miracles.” 

However that may be, the modern age continued to operate un- 
der the assumption that life, and not the world, is the highest good 
of man; in its boldest and most radical revisions and criticisms of 
traditional beliefs and concepts, it never even thought of challeng- 
ing this fundamental reversal which Christianity had brought into 

[ ns ] 


the dying ancient world. No matter how articulate and how con- 
scious the thinkers of modernity were in their attacks on tradition, 
the priority of life over everything else had acquired for them the 
status of a “self-evident truth,” and as such it has survived even in 
our present world, which has begun already to leave the whole 
modern age behind and to substitute for a laboring society the so- 
ciety of jobholders. But while it is quite conceivable that the devel- 
opment following upon the discovery of the Archimedean point 
would have taken an altogether different direction if it had taken 
place seventeen hundred years earlier, when not life but the world 
was still the highest good of man, it by no means follows that we 
still live in a Christian world. For what matters today is not the 
immortality of life, but that life is the highest good. And while this 
assumption certainly is Christian in origin, it constitutes no more 
than an important attending circumstance for the Christian faith. 
Moreover, even if we disregard the details of Christian dogma and 
consider only the general mood of Christianity, which resides in 
the importance of faith, it is obvious that nothing could be more 
detrimental to this spirit than the spirit of distrust and suspicion of 
the modern age. Surely, Cartesian doubt has proved its efficiency 
nowhere more disastrously and irretrievably than in the realm of 
religious belief, where it was introduced by Pascal and Kierke- 
gaard, the two greatest religious thinkers of modernity. (For what 
undermined the Christian faith was not the atheism of the eight- 
eenth century or the materialism of the nineteenth — their argu- 
ments are frequently vulgar and, for the most part, easily refutable 
by traditional theology — but rather the doubting concern with sal- 
vation of genuinely religious men, in whose eyes the traditional 
Christian content and promise had become “absurd.”) 

Just as we do not know what would have happened if the Archi- 
medean point had been discovered before the rise of Christianity, 
we are in no position to ascertain what the destiny of Christianity 
would have been if the great awakening of the Renaissance had not 
been interrupted by this event. Before Galileo, all paths still 
seemed to be open. If we think back to Leonardo, we may well 
imagine that a technical revolution would have overtaken the de- 
velopment of humanity in any case. This might well have led to 
flight, the realization of one of the oldest and most persistent 

[ 319 ]

dreams of man, but it hardly would have led into the universe; it 
might well have brought about the unification of the earth, but it 
hardly would have brought about the transformation of matter into 
energy and the adventure into the microscopic universe. The only 
thing we can be sure of is that the coincidence of the reversal of 
doing and contemplating with the earlier reversal of life and world 
became the point of departure for the whole modern development. 
Only when the vita activa had lost its point of reference in the vita 
contemplativa could it become active life in the full sense of the 
word; and only because this active life remained bound to life as 
its only point of reference could life as such, the laboring metabo- 
lism of man with nature, become active and unfold its entire fer- 
tility. 

[[[the victory of the Animal Laborans]]]

The victory of the animal laborans would never have been complete 
had not the process of secularization, the modern loss of faith in- 
evitably arising from Cartesian doubt, deprived individual life of 
its immortality, or at least of the certainty of immortality. Individ- 
ual life again became mortal, as mortal as it had been in antiquity, 
and the world was even less stable, less permanent, and hence less 
to be relied upon than it had been during the Christian era. Modern 
man, when he lost the certainty of a world to come, was thrown 
back upon himself and not upon this world; far from believing that 
the world might be potentially immortal, he was not even sure that 
it was real. And in so far as he was to assume that it was real in the 
uncritical and apparently unbothered optimism of a steadily pro- 
gressing science, he had removed himself from the earth to a much 
more distant point than any Christian otherworldliness had ever 
removed him. Whatever the word “secular” is meant to signify in 
current usage, historically it cannot possibly be equated with 
worldliness; modern man at any rate did not gain this world when 
he lost the other world, and he did not gain life, strictly speaking, 
either; he was thrust back upon it, thrown into the closed inward- 
ness of introspection, where the highest he could experience were 
the empty processes of reckoning of the mind, its play with itself. 
The only contents left were appetites and desires, the senseless 

[ 320 ] 

urges of his body which he mistook for passion and which he 
deemed to be “unreasonable” because he found he could not “rea- 
son,” that is, not reckon with them. The only thing that could now 
be potentially immortal, as immortal as the body politic in antiq- 
uity and as individual life during the Middle Ages, was life itself, 
that is, the possibly everlasting life process of the species man- 
kind. 

We saw before that in the rise of society it was ultimately the 
life of the species which asserted itself. Theoretically, the turning 
point from the earlier modem age’s insistence on the “egoistic” 
life of the individual to its later emphasis on “social” life and 
“socialized man” (Marx) came when Marx transformed the 
cruder notion of classical economy — that all men, in so far as they 
act at all, act for reasons of self-interest — into forces of interest 
which inform, move, and direct the classes of society, and through 
their conflicts direct society as a whole. Socialized mankind is that 
state of society where only one interest rules, and the subject of 
this interest is either classes or man-kind, but neither man nor men. 
The point is that now even the last trace of action in what men 
were doing, the motive implied in self-interest, disappeared. What 
was left was a “natural force,” the force of the life process itself, 
to which all men and all human activities were equally submitted 
(“the thought process itself is a natural process”) and whose only 
aim, if it had an aim at all, was survival of the animal species man. 
None of the higher capacities of man was any longer necessary to 
connect individual life with the life of the species; individual life 
became part of the life process, and to labor, to assure the con- 
tinuity of one’s own life and the life of his family, was all that was 
needed. What was not needed, not necessitated by life’s metabo- 
lism with nature, was either superfluous or could be justified only 
in terms of a peculiarity of human as distinguished from other 
animal life-— so that Milton was considered to have written his 
Paradise Lost for the same reasons and out of similar urges that 
compel the silkworm to produce silk. 

If we compare the modern world with that of the past, the loss ot 
human experience involved in this development is extraordinarily 
striking. It is not only and not even primarily contemplation which 

[ 321 ] 


has become an entirely meaningless experience. Thought itself, 
when it became “reckoning with consequences,” became a func- 
tion of the brain, with the result that electronic instruments are 
found to fulfil these functions much better than we ever could. 
Action was soon and still is almost exclusively understood in terms 
of making and fabricating, only that making, because of its world- 
liness and inherent indifference to life, was now regarded as but 
another form of laboring, a more complicated but not a more 
mysterious function of the life process. 

Meanwhile, we have proved ingenious enough to find ways to 
ease the toil and trouble of living to the point where an elimination 
of laboring from the range of human activities can no longer be 
regarded as utopian. For even now, laboring is too lofty, too am- 
bitious a word for what we are doing, or think we are doing, in the 
world we have come to live in. The last stage of the laboring so- 
ciety, the society of jobholders, demands of its members a sheer 
automatic functioning, as though individual life had actually been 
submerged in the over-all life process of the species and the only 
active decision still required of the individual were to let go, so to 
speak, to abandon his individuality, the still individually sensed 
pain and trouble of living, and acquiesce in a dazed, “tranquil- 
ized,” functional type of behavior. The trouble with modern the- 
ories of behaviorism is not that they are wrong but that they could 
become true, that they actually are the best possible conceptualiza- 
tion of certain obvious trends in modern society. It is quite con- 
ceivable that the modern age — which began with such an unprece- 
dented and promising outburst of human activity — may end in the 
deadliest, most sterile passivity history has ever known. 

But there are other more serious danger signs that man may be 
willing and, indeed, is on the point of developing into that animal 
species from which, since Darwin, he imagines he has come. If, in 
concluding, we return once more to the discovery of the Archime- 
dean point and apply it, as Kafka warned us not to do, to man him- 
self and to what he is doing on this earth, it at once becomes mani- 
fest that all his activities, watched from a sufficiently removed 
vantage point in the universe, would appear not as activities of any 
kind but as processes, so that, as a scientist recently put it, modem 
motorization would appear like a process of biological mutation in 

[ 322 ] 

which human bodies gradually begin to be covered by shells of 
steel. For the watcher from the universe, this mutation would be no 
more or less mysterious than the mutation which now goes on 
before our eyes in those small living organisms which we fought 
with antibiotics and which mysteriously have developed new 
strains to resist us. How deep-rooted this usage of the Archime- 
dean point against ourselves is can be seen in the very metaphors 
which dominate scientific thought today. The reason why scien- 
tists can tell us about the “life” in the atom— where apparently 
every particle is “free” to behave as it wants and the laws ruling 
these movements are the same statistical laws which, according to 
the social scientists, rule human behavior and make the multitude 
behave as it must, no matter how “free” the individual particle 
may appear to be in its choices— the reason, in other words, why 
the behavior of the infinitely small particle is not only similar in 
pattern to the planetary system as it appears to us but resembles the 
life and behavior patterns in human society is, of course, that we 
look and live in this society as though we were as far removed 
from our own human existence as we are from the infinitely small 
and the immensely large which, even if they could be perceived by 
the finest instruments, are too far away from us to be experienced. 

Needless to say, this does not mean that modern man has lost his 
capacities or is on the point of losing them. No matter what sociol- 
ogy, psychology, and anthropology will tell us about the “social 
animal,” men persist in making, fabricating, and building, although 
these faculties are more and more restricted to the abilities of the 
artist, so that the concomitant experiences of worldliness escape 
more and more the range of ordinary human experience.

Similarly, the capacity for action, at least in the sense of the 
releasing of processes, is still with us, although it has become the 
exclusive prerogative of the scientists, who have enlarged the 

[ 325 ] 

realm of human affairs to the point of extinguishing the time- 
honored protective dividing line between nature and the human 
world. In view of such achievements, performed for centuries in 
the unseen quiet of the laboratories, it seems only proper that their 
deeds should eventually have turned out to have greater news 
value, to be of greater political significance, than the administrative 
and diplomatic doings of most so-called statesmen. It certainly is 
not without irony that those whom public opinion has persistently 
held to be the least practical and the least political members of 
society should have turned out to be the only ones left who still 
know how to act and how to act in concert. For their early organi- 
zations, which they founded in the seventeenth century for the 
conquest of nature and in which they developed their own moral 
standards and their own code of honor, have not only survived all 
vicissitudes of the modern age, but they have become one of the 
most potent power-generating groups in all history. But the action 
of the scientists, since it acts into nature from the standpoint of the 
universe and not into the web of human relationships, lacks the 
revelatory character of action as well as the ability to produce 
stories and become historical, which together form the very source 
from which meaningfulness springs into and illuminates human ex- 
istence. In this existentially most important aspect, action, too, has 
become an experience for the privileged few, and these few who 
still know what it means to act may well be even fewer than the 
artists, their experience even rarer than the genuine experience of 
and love for the world. 

Thought, finally — which we, following the premodern as well 
as the modern tradition, omitted from our reconsideration of the 
vita activa — is still possible, and no doubt actual, wherever men 
live under the conditions of political freedom. Unfortunately, and 
contrary to what is currently assumed about the proverbial ivory- 
tower independence of thinkers, no other human capacity is so 
vulnerable, and it is in fact far easier to act under conditions of 
tyranny than it is to think. As a living experience, thought has al- 
ways been assumed, perhaps wrongly, to be known only to the 
few. It may not be presumptuous to believe that these few have 
not become fewer in our time. This may be irrelevant, or of re- 
stricted relevance, for the future of the world; it is not irrelevant 

[ K* ] 

for the future of man. For if no other test but the experience of 
being active, no other measure but the extent of sheer activity were 
to be applied to the various activities within the vita activa , it might 
well be that thinking as such would surpass them all. Whoever has 
any experience in this matter will know how right Cato was when 
he said: Numquam se plus agere quam nihil cum ageret , numquam 
minus solum esse quam cum solus esset — “Never is he more active 
than when he does nothing, never is he less alone than when he is 
by himself.” 
